@node capi
@chapter C language programming interface


The executable @value{EXECUTABLE} defines a number of C language
functions that can be invoked by compiled code to access various
services, both to handle startup and to access the operating system.

When on a @gnu{}+Linux system: the Linux specific functions are
available; when on other systems: calling such functions will terminate
the process.

@menu
* capi ffi::                    C language level @ffi{}.
* capi posix::                  C language level @posix{} interface.
* capi linux::                  C language level @gnu{}+Linux interface.
* capi glibc::                  C language level @gnu{} C Library
                                interface.
@end menu

@c page
@node capi ffi
@section C language level @ffi{}


@menu
* capi ffi accessors::          Raw memory accessors.
* capi ffi mutators::           Raw memory mutators.
@end menu

@c page
@node capi ffi accessors
@subsection Raw memory accessors


@subsubheading Bit--sized values

In all the following definitions: @var{pointer} must be a pointer
object, @var{offset} must be an exact integer.


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_ref_uint8 (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset})
Extract and return the 8-bit unsigned integer at @var{offset} from
@var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_ref_sint8 (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset})
Extract and return the 8-bit signed integer at @var{offset} from
@var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_ref_uint16 (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset})
Extract and return the 16-bit unsigned integer at @var{offset} from
@var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_ref_sint16 (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset})
Extract and return the 16-bit signed integer at @var{offset} from
@var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_ref_uint32 (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Extract and return the 32-bit unsigned integer at @var{offset} from
@var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_ref_sint32 (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Extract and return the 32-bit signed integer at @var{offset} from
@var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_ref_uint64 (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Extract and return the 64-bit unsigned integer at @var{offset} from
@var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_ref_sint64 (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Extract and return the 64-bit signed integer at @var{offset} from
@var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading C language integer type--sized values

In all the following definitions: @var{pointer} must be a pointer
object, @var{offset} must be an exact integer.


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_ref_char (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset})
Extract and return the exact integer representation of the C language
@code{signed char} value at @var{offset} from @var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_ref_uchar (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset})
Extract and return the exact integer representation of the C language
@code{unsigned char} value at @var{offset} from @var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_ref_short (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset})
Extract and return the exact integer representation of the C language
@code{signed short int} value at @var{offset} from @var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_ref_ushort (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset})
Extract and return the exact integer representation of the C language
@code{unsigned short int} value at @var{offset} from @var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_ref_long (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset})
Extract and return the exact integer representation of the C language
@code{signed long} value at @var{offset} from @var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_ref_ulong (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset})
Extract and return the exact integer representation of the C language
@code{unsigned long} value at @var{offset} from @var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_ref_longlong (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset})
Extract and return the exact integer representation of the C language
@code{signed long long} value at @var{offset} from @var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_ref_ulonglong (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset})
Extract and return the exact integer representation of the C language
@code{unsigned long long} value at @var{offset} from @var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Other C language type--sized values

In all the following definitions: @var{pointer} must be a pointer
object, @var{offset} must be an exact integer.


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_ref_float (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset})
Extract and return the flonum representation of the C language
@code{float} value at @var{offset} from @var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_ref_double (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset})
Extract and return the flonum representation of the C language
@code{double} value at @var{offset} from @var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_ref_pointer (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset})
Extract and return the pointer representation of the C language
@code{void *} value at @var{offset} from @var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun

@c page
@node capi ffi mutators
@subsection Raw memory mutators


@subsubheading Bit--sized values

In all the following definitions: @var{pointer} must be a pointer
object, @var{offset} and @var{value} must be an exact integers.


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_set_uint8 (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset}, ikptr @var{value})
Store the 8-bit unsigned integer @var{value} at @var{offset} from
@var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_set_sint8 (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset}, ikptr @var{value})
Store the 8-bit signed integer @var{value} at @var{offset} from
@var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_set_uint16 (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset}, ikptr @var{value})
Store the 16-bit unsigned integer @var{value} at @var{offset} from
@var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_set_sint16 (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset}, ikptr @var{value})
Store the 16-bit signed integer @var{value} at @var{offset} from
@var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_set_uint32 (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset}, ikptr @var{value})
Store the 32-bit unsigned integer @var{value} at @var{offset} from
@var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_set_sint32 (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset}, ikptr @var{value})
Store the 32-bit signed integer @var{value} at @var{offset} from
@var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_set_uint64 (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset}, ikptr @var{value})
Store the 64-bit unsigned integer @var{value} at @var{offset} from
@var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_set_sint64 (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset}, ikptr @var{value})
Store the 64-bit signed integer @var{value} at @var{offset} from
@var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading C language integer type--sized values

In all the following definitions: @var{pointer} must be a pointer
object, @var{offset} and @var{value} must be an exact integers.


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_set_char (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset}, ikptr @var{value})
Store the exact integer @var{value} representing a C language
@code{signed char} value at @var{offset} from @var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_set_uchar (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset}, ikptr @var{value})
Store the exact integer @var{value} representing a C language
@code{unsigned char} value at @var{offset} from @var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_set_short (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset}, ikptr @var{value})
Store the exact integer @var{value} representing a C language
@code{signed short int} value at @var{offset} from @var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_set_ushort (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset}, ikptr @var{value})
Store the exact integer @var{value} representing a C language
@code{unsigned short int} value at @var{offset} from @var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_set_int (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset}, ikptr @var{value})
Store the exact integer @var{value} representing a C language
@code{signed int} value at @var{offset} from @var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_set_uint (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset}, ikptr @var{value})
Store the exact integer @var{value} representing a C language
@code{unsigned int} value at @var{offset} from @var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_set_long (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset}, ikptr @var{value})
Store the exact integer @var{value} representing a C language
@code{signed long} value at @var{offset} from @var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_set_ulong (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset}, ikptr @var{value})
Store the exact integer @var{value} representing a C language
@code{unsigned long} value at @var{offset} from @var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_set_longlong (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset}, ikptr @var{value})
Store the exact integer @var{value} representing a C language
@code{signed long long} value at @var{offset} from @var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_set_ulonglong (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset}, ikptr @var{value})
Store the exact integer @var{value} representing a C language
@code{unsigned long long} value at @var{offset} from @var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Other C language type--sized values

In all the following definitions: @var{pointer} must be a pointer
object, @var{offset} must be an exact integer.


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_set_float (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset}, ikptr @var{value})
Store the flonum @var{value} representing a C language @code{float}
value at @var{offset} from @var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_set_double (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset}, ikptr @var{value})
Store the flonum @var{value} representing a C language @code{double}
value at @var{offset} from @var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_set_pointer (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{offset}, ikptr @var{value})
Store the pointer @var{value} representing a C language @code{void *}
value at @var{offset} from @var{pointer}.
@end deftypefun

@c page
@node capi posix
@section C language level @posix{} interface


Several files are involved in the full implementation of the @posix{}
interface:

@example
src/ikarus-posix.c
lib/vicare/unsafe-capi.sls
scheme/ikarus.posix.sls
scheme/makefile.sps
tests/test-vicare-posix.sps
@end example

File pathnames are bytevectors at the C language level and strings at
the Scheme language level; the conversion is performed with the function
in the parameter @func{string->filename-func}.

The authoritative documentation for all the interface functions is the
one of the C library on the platform's operating system; this file gives
only a brief overview of the features and explains the Scheme
adaptation.

@menu
* capi posix adding::           How to add a @posix{} primitive.
* capi posix errno::            Handling @code{errno} codes.
* capi posix env::              Operating system environment variables.
* capi posix port::             File descriptors and Scheme ports.
* capi posix pid::              Process identifier functions.
* capi posix process::          Forking and executing processes.
* capi posix status::           Process termination status.
* capi posix signals::          Delivering interprocess signals.
* capi posix stat::             File system inspection.
* capi posix file::             File system interface.
* capi posix link::             Hard and symbolic links.
* capi posix dir::              File system directories.
* capi posix fd::               File descriptors at low level.
* capi posix socket::           Network sockets.
* capi posix users::            Users and groups.
* capi posix job::              Job control.
* capi posix time::             Time and date.
@end menu

@c page
@node capi posix adding
@subsection How to add a @posix{} primitive


We must remember that the @posix{} primitives end up exported by both
the @library{vicare} and @library{ikarus} libraries; following the
example of the @cfunc{getpid} function, to add a @posix{} primitive we
should follow these steps:

@enumerate
@item
In the file @file{src/ikarus-posix.c} add the primitive C language
function:

@example
ikptr
ikrt_posix_getpid(void)
@{
  int   retval = getpid();
  return fix(retval);
@}
@end example

@item
In the file @file{lib/vicare/unsafe-capi.sls} add the following macro
definition to the library:

@example
(define-inline (posix-getpid)
  (foreign-call "ikrt_posix_getpid"))
@end example

@noindent
and add the binding to the export list.

@item
In the file @file{scheme/ikarus.posix.sls}: add the binding to both the
export list of the library and to the @code{except} import list from
@library{ikarus}; add the function implementation calling a syntax
associated to the foreign function:

@example
(define (getpid)
  (posix-getpid))
@end example

@item
In the file @file{scheme/makefile.sps}: add an entry for the function to
the list bound to @code{identifier->library-map} to have the function
exported by @library{ikarus} and @library{vicare}:

@example
(getpid         i v)
@end example

@item
In the file @file{tests/test-vicare-posix.sps} add test cases for the
function.
@end enumerate

@c page
@node capi posix errno
@subsection Handling @code{errno} codes


@value{PRJNAME} makes use of the platform's own @code{errno} codes; they
are negated to make them different from file descriptors, and so
distinguishable when used as single return values from C functions, and
converted to fixnums.  Example: if the C language code for @code{EPERM}
is the integer @code{1}, the corresponding Scheme language value is the
fixnum @code{-1}.


@deftypefun ikptr ik_errno_to_code (void)
Negate the current @code{errno} value and convert the result into a
fixnum, return the fixnum.  When an error occurs: many functions call
this function and return its return value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_strerror (ikptr @var{ec}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{strerror}, @glibcref{Error Messages,
strerror}.  Convert a fixnum representing an encoded @code{errno} code
into a bytevector holding the string message which describes it; return
a reference to the bytevector; if @var{ec} is invalid: return false.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_last_errno (ikpcb * pcb)
Return a fixnum representing the negated value of @code{errno} right
after the last call to a foreign function through the @ffi{}.
@end deftypefun

@c page
@node capi posix env
@subsection Accessing environment variables


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_getenv (ikptr @var{variable}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{getenv}, @glibcref{Environment
Access, getenv}.  Retrieve the value of environment variables.
@var{variable} must reference a bytevector object representing the name
of the environment variable.  If the environment variable is set: return
a bytevector representing its value; else return false.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_setenv (ikptr @var{variable}, ikptr @var{value}, ikptr @var{overwrite})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{setenv}, @glibcref{Environment
Access, setenv}.  Set a new value for an environment variable.

@var{variable} must reference a bytevector object representing the name
of the environment variable; @var{value} must reference a bytevector
object representing the new value.  If @var{overwrite} is
@code{IK_FALSE_OBJECT} and the environment variable already exists: the
environment variable is left untouched; else the new value is set,
either creating a new environment variable or replacing the old value.

If successful return @code{IK_TRUE_OBJECT}; if an error occurs in
@cfunc{setenv} return @code{IK_FALSE_OBJECT}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_unsetenv (ikptr @var{variable})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{unsetenv}, @glibcref{Environment
Access, unsetenv}.  Unset an environment variable.  @var{variable} must
reference a bytevector object representing the name of the environment
variable.  Return true if @var{variable} has the correct format, else
return false; there is no way to know if a variable was actually unset.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_environ (ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the global C variable @code{environ}, @glibcref{Environment
Access, unsetenv}.  Retrieve the full environment.  Return a list of
bytevectors representing the contents of the @code{environ} array; if
the environment is empty (no environment variables set) return nil.
@end deftypefun

@c page
@node capi posix port
@subsection File descriptors and Scheme ports


@menu
* capi posix port open::        Opening and closing file descriptors.
* capi posix port seek::        Handling file descriptor cursor.
* capi posix port rw::          Reading and writing.
* capi posix port event::       Handling file descriptor events.
@end menu

@c page
@node capi posix port open
@subsubsection Opening and closing file descriptors


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_close_fd (ikptr @var{fd})
Interface to the @cfunc{close} C function.  @glibcref{Opening and
Closing Files, close}.  Close a file descriptor.

@var{fd} must be a fixnum representing a file descriptor.

If successful return @code{IK_FALSE_OBJECT}; if an error occurs in
@cfunc{close} return the return value of @cfunc{ik_errno_to_code}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_open_input_fd (ikptr @var{pathname})
Interface to the @cfunc{open} C function.  @glibcref{Opening and Closing
Files, open}.  Open a file for reading, using open mode @code{O_RDONLY}.

@var{pathname} must reference a bytevector object holding the file
pathname.

If successful return a fixnum representing the file descriptor; if an
error occurs in @cfunc{open} return the return value of
@cfunc{ik_errno_to_code}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_open_output_fd (ikptr @var{pathname}, ikptr @var{opts})
Interface to the @cfunc{open} C function.  @glibcref{Opening and Closing
Files, open}.  Open a file for writing with configurable mode based on
@code{O_WRONLY}; the access permissions when a new file is created are
@code{S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR | S_IRGRP | S_IROTH}.

@var{pathname} must reference a bytevector object holding the file
pathname; @var{opts} must be a fixnum with the following encoding:

@table @code
@item 0
The open mode is @code{O_WRONLY | O_CREAT | O_EXCL}.

@item 1
The open mode is @code{O_WRONLY | O_TRUNC}.

@item 2
The open mode is @code{O_WRONLY | O_TRUNC | O_CREAT}.

@item 3
The open mode is @code{O_WRONLY | O_TRUNC}.

@item 4
The open mode is @code{O_WRONLY | O_CREAT | O_EXCL}.

@item 5
The open mode is @code{O_WRONLY | O_CREAT}.

@item 6
The open mode is @code{O_WRONLY | O_CREAT}.

@item 7
The open mode is @code{O_WRONLY}.
@end table

If successful return a fixnum representing the file descriptor; if an
error occurs in @cfunc{open} return the return value of
@cfunc{ik_errno_to_code}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_open_input_output_fd (ikptr @var{pathname}, ikptr @var{opts})
Interface to the @cfunc{open} C function.  @glibcref{Opening and Closing
Files, open}.  Open a file for reading and writing with configurable
mode based on @code{O_RDWR}; the access permissions when a new file is
created are @code{S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR | S_IRGRP | S_IROTH}.

@var{pathname} must reference a bytevector object holding the file
pathname; @var{opts} must be a fixnum representing the opening flags, it
has the same format of the @var{opts} argument to
@func{ikrt_open_output_fd}.

If successful return a fixnum representing the file descriptor; if an
error occurs in @cfunc{open} return the return value of
@cfunc{ik_errno_to_code}.
@end deftypefun

@c page
@node capi posix port seek
@subsubsection Handling file descriptor cursor


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_set_position (ikptr @var{fd}, ikptr @var{pos})
Interface to the @cfunc{lseek} C function.  @glibcref{File Position
Primitive, lseek}.  Set the cursor position.

@var{fd} must be a fixnum representing a file descriptor; @var{pos} must
be an exact integer in the range of the @code{off_t} platform type.

If successful return @code{IK_FALSE_OBJECT}; if an error occurs in
@cfunc{lseek} return the return value of @cfunc{ik_errno_to_code}.
@end deftypefun

@c page
@node capi posix port rw
@subsubsection Reading and writing


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_read_fd (ikptr @var{fd}, ikptr @var{buffer}, ikptr @var{buffer-start}, ikptr @var{size})
Interface to the @cfunc{read} C function.  @glibcref{Input and Output
Primitives, read}.  Read data from a file descriptor.

@var{fd} must be a fixnum representing a file descriptor; @var{buffer}
must reference a bytevector object in which the data will be stored;
@var{buffer-start} must be a fixnum representing the offset in the
buffer at which data will be written; @var{size} must be a fixnum
representing the number of bytes to read.

If successful return a fixnum representing the number of bytes actually
read and stored in the buffer; if an error occurs in @cfunc{read} return
the return value of @cfunc{ik_errno_to_code}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_write_fd (ikptr @var{fd}, ikptr @var{buffer}, ikptr @var{buffer-start}, ikptr @var{size})
Interface to the @cfunc{write} C function.  @glibcref{Input and Output
Primitives, write}.  Write data to a file descriptor.

@var{fd} must be a fixnum representing a file descriptor; @var{buffer}
must reference a bytevector object from which the data will be read;
@var{buffer-start} must be a fixnum representing the offset in the
buffer from which data will be read; @var{size} must be a fixnum
representing the number of bytes to write.

If successful return a fixnum representing the number of bytes actually
written; if an error occurs in @cfunc{write} return the return value of
@cfunc{ik_errno_to_code}.
@end deftypefun

@c page
@node capi posix port event
@subsubsection Handling file descriptor events


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_select (ikptr @var{max-fd}, ikptr @var{rfds}, ikptr @var{wfds}, ikptr @var{xfds})
Interface to the @cfunc{select} C function.  @glibcref{Waiting for I/O,
select}.  Poll for events on sets of file descriptors, without timeout.

@var{max-fd} must be a fixnum representing the maximum file descriptor
for which to wait for events; @var{rfds}, @var{wfds} and @var{xfds} must
reference bytevectors holding @code{fd_set} data structures.

If successful return a fixnum representing the return value from
@cfunc{select}; if an error occurs in @cfunc{select} return the return
value of @cfunc{ik_errno_to_code}.  Notice that if the call is
interrupted by a signal, so it returns with @code{EINTR}, the function
returns with error without reattempting the call.
@end deftypefun

@c page
@node capi posix pid
@subsection Process identifier functions


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_getpid (void)
Return the process identifier as fixnum.  @glibcref{Process
Identification, getpid}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_getppid (void)
Return the parent process identifier as fixnum.  @glibcref{Process
Identification, getpid}.
@end deftypefun

@c page
@node capi posix process
@subsection Forking and executing processes


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_system (ikptr @var{command})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{system}, @glibcref{Running a Command,
system}.  Execute a command through the system shell; @var{command} must
reference a bytevector object holding the command to execute.  If
successful return the termination status of the executed process,
@ref{capi posix status} for details; if an error occurs: return an
encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_fork (void)
Interface to the C function @cfunc{fork}, @glibcref{Creating a Process,
fork}.  Create a new process by forking the current; if successful
return a non--negative fixnum representing the the return value of
@cfunc{fork}; if an error occurs: return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_execv (ikptr @var{filename}, ikptr @var{argv})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{execv}, @glibcref{Executing a File,
execv}.  @var{filename} must be a bytevector representing the pathname
of an executable file; @var{argv} must be a list of bytevectors
representing command line arguments.  Execute the command; if the
function returns: an error has occurred, return an encoded @code{errno}
value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_execve (ikptr @var{filename}, ikptr @var{argv}, ikptr @var{env})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{execve}, @glibcref{Executing a File,
execve}.  @var{filename} must be a bytevector representing the pathname
of an executable file; @var{argv} must be a list of bytevectors
representing command line arguments; @var{env} must be a list of
bytevectors representing environment variables assignments.  Execute the
command; if the function returns: an error has occurred, return an
encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_execvp (ikptr @var{filename}, ikptr @var{argv})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{execvp}, @glibcref{Executing a File,
execvp}.  @var{filename} must be a bytevector representing the file name
of an executable file reachable in the current @env{PATH}; @var{argv}
must be a list of bytevectors representing command line arguments.
Execute the command; if the function returns: an error has occurred,
return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun

@c page
@node capi posix status
@subsection Process termination status


The following functions accept as argument a fixnum representing the
process termination status, for example the return value of
@cfunc{system} or the status acquired by @cfunc{waitpid}.


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_waitpid (ikptr @var{pid}, ikptr @var{options})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{waitpid}, @glibcref{Process
Completion, waitpid}.  Request status informations on a process or group
of processes knowing the identifier.  If successful return a fixnum
representing the status; if an error occurs: return an encoded
@code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_wait (void)
Interface to the C function @cfunc{wait}, @glibcref{Process Completion,
wait}.  Request status informations on any process or group of
processes.  If successful return a fixnum representing the status; if an
error occurs: return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_WIFEXITED (ikptr @var{status})
Interface to the C macro @cfunc{WIFEXITED}, @glibcref{Process Completion
Status, WIFEXITED}.  Return true if the process terminated normally with
@cfunc{exit}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_WEXITSTATUS (ikptr @var{status})
Interface to the C macro @cfunc{WEXITSTATUS}, @glibcref{Process
Completion Status, WEXITSTATUS}.  If @cfunc{WIFEXITED} applied to
@var{status} would return true: return the low--order @math{8} bits from
the exit status, which is the process exit status selected with
@cfunc{exit}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_WIFSIGNALED (ikptr @var{status})
Interface to the C macro @cfunc{WIFSIGNALED}, @glibcref{Process
Completion Status, WIFSIGNALED}.  Return true if the process terminated
because it received an interprocess signal which was not handled.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_WTERMSIG (ikptr @var{status})
Interface to the C macro @cfunc{WTERMSIG}, @glibcref{Process Completion
Status, WTERMSIG}.  If @cfunc{WIFSIGNALED} applied to @var{status} would
return true: return the number of the interprocess signal that
terminated the process.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_WCOREDUMP (ikptr @var{status})
Interface to the C macro @cfunc{WCOREDUMP}, @glibcref{Process Completion
Status, WCOREDUMP}.  Return true if the process terminated and produced
a core dump.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_WIFSTOPPED (ikptr @var{status})
Interface to the C macro @cfunc{WIFSTOPPED}, @glibcref{Process
Completion Status, WIFSTOPPED}.  Return true if the process is stopped.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_WSTOPSIG (ikptr @var{status})
Interface to the C macro @cfunc{WSTOPSIG}, @glibcref{Process Completion
Status, WSTOPSIG}.  If @cfunc{WIFSTOPPED} applied to @var{status} would
return true: return the number of the interprocess signal that caused
the process to stop.
@end deftypefun

@c page
@node capi posix signals
@subsection Delivering interprocess signals


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_raise (ikptr @var{signum})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{raise}, @glibcref{Signaling Yourself,
raise}.  Send the selected signal to the calling process.  If successful
return zero, else return an encoded @code{errno} code.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_kill (ikptr @var{pid}, ikptr @var{signum})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{kill}, @glibcref{Signaling Another
Process, kill}.  Send the selected signal to selected process.  If
successful return zero, else return an encoded @code{errno} code.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_pause (void)
Interface to the C function @cfunc{pause}, @glibcref{Using Pause,
pause}.  Suspend the process until a signal is received.  Return the
void object.
@end deftypefun

@c page
@node capi posix stat
@subsection File system inspection


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_stat (ikptr @var{pathname}, ikptr @var{stat}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
@deftypefunx ikptr ikrt_posix_lstat (ikptr @var{pathname}, ikptr @var{stat}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interfaces to the C functions @cfunc{stat} and @cfunc{lstat},
@glibcref{Reading Attributes, stat}.  Inspect the file system entry
selected by @var{pathname}, which must be a bytevector, and fill the
@code{struct-stat} instance referenced by @var{stat} with the results.
If successful return zero, else return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_fstat (ikptr @var{fd}, ikptr @var{stat}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{fstat}, @glibcref{Reading Attributes,
fstat}.  Inspect the file system entry associated to the file descriptor
@var{fd}, which must be a fixnum, and fill the @code{struct-stat}
instance referenced by @var{stat} with the results.  If successful
return zero, else return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_file_is_directory (ikptr @var{pathname}, ikptr @var{follow})
@deftypefunx ikptr ikrt_posix_file_is_char_device (ikptr @var{pathname}, ikptr @var{follow})
@deftypefunx ikptr ikrt_posix_file_is_block_device (ikptr @var{pathname}, ikptr @var{follow})
@deftypefunx ikptr ikrt_posix_file_is_regular_file (ikptr @var{pathname}, ikptr @var{follow})
@deftypefunx ikptr ikrt_posix_file_is_symbolic_link (ikptr @var{pathname}, ikptr @var{follow})
@deftypefunx ikptr ikrt_posix_file_is_socket (ikptr @var{pathname}, ikptr @var{follow})
@deftypefunx ikptr ikrt_posix_file_is_fifo (ikptr @var{pathname}, ikptr @var{follow})
@deftypefunx ikptr ikrt_posix_file_is_message_queue (ikptr @var{pathname}, ikptr @var{follow})
@deftypefunx ikptr ikrt_posix_file_is_semaphore (ikptr @var{pathname}, ikptr @var{follow})
@deftypefunx ikptr ikrt_posix_file_is_shared_memory (ikptr @var{pathname}, ikptr @var{follow})
Return @true{} or @false{} whether the file system entry selected by
@var{pathname}, which must be a bytevector, is of the specified type; if
an error occurs return an encoded @code{errno} value.  When @var{follow}
is true: @cfunc{stat} is used to inspect the entry, else @cfunc{lstat}
is used.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_access (ikptr @var{pathname}, ikptr @var{how})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{access}, @glibcref{Testing File
Access, access}.  Test the access mode selected by @var{how}, which must
be a fixnum, for the file system entry selected by @var{pathname}, which
must be a bytevector.  Return @true{} or @false{} or an encoded
@code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_file_size (ikptr @var{filename}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Determine the size of the file selected by @var{filename}, which must be
a bytevector, relying on a call to @cfunc{stat}.  If successful: return
an exact integer representing the size, else return an encoded
@code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_file_atime (ikptr @var{pathname}, ikptr @var{vector}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
@deftypefunx ikptr ikrt_posix_file_mtime (ikptr @var{pathname}, ikptr @var{vector}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
@deftypefunx ikptr ikrt_posix_file_ctime (ikptr @var{pathname}, ikptr @var{vector}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Compute an exact integer representing the access, modification and
creation times for @var{pathname}, which must be a bytevector.  If
successful return zero, else return an encoded @code{errno} value.

The @var{vector} argument must be a vector which is mutated as follows:
the first item holds an exact integer representing the number of
seconds, the second item holds an exact integer representing the number
of microseconds.
@end deftypefun

@c page
@node capi posix file
@subsection File system interface


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_chown (ikptr @var{pathname}, ikptr @var{owner}, ikptr @var{group})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{chown}, @glibcref{File Owner, chown}.
Changes the owner and group of the file system entry selected by
@var{pathname}, which must be a bytevector.  @var{owner} and @var{group}
must be fixnums.  If successful return zero, else return an encoded
@code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_fchown (ikptr @var{fd}, ikptr @var{owner}, ikptr @var{group})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{fchown}, @glibcref{File Owner,
fchown}.  Changes the owner and group of the file system entry selected
by @var{fd}, which must be a fixnum representing a platform file
descriptor.  @var{owner} and @var{group} must be fixnums.  If successful
return zero, else return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_chmod (ikptr @var{pathname}, ikptr @var{mode})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{chmod}, @glibcref{Setting
Permissions, chmod}.  Change to @var{mode}, which must be a fixnum, the
access permissions for the file system entry selected by @var{pathname},
which must be a bytevector.  If successful return zero, else return an
encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_fchmod (ikptr @var{fd}, ikptr @var{mode})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{fchmod}, @glibcref{Setting
Permissions, fchmod}.  Change to @var{mode}, which must be a fixnum, the
access permissions for the file system entry associated to @var{fd},
which must be a fixnum representing a platform file descriptor.  If
successful return zero, else return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_umask (ikptr @var{mask})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{umask}, @glibcref{Setting
Permissions, umask}.  Set the current file creation mask to @var{mask}
which must be a fixnum and return the previous mask as a fixnum.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_getumask (void)
Interface to the C function @cfunc{getumask}, @glibcref{Setting
Permissions, getumask}.  Return the current file creation mask as a
fixnum.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_utime (ikptr @var{pathname}, ikptr @var{atime_sec}, ikptr @var{mtime_sec})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{utime}, @glibcref{File Times, utime}.
Set the access and modification times of the file system entry selected
by @var{pathname}, which must be a bytevector, to the specified counts
of seconds; both @var{atime_sec} and @var{mtime_sec} must be fixnums.
If successful return zero, else return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_utimes (ikptr @var{pathname}, ikptr @var{atime_sec}, ikptr @var{atime_usec}, ikptr @var{mtime_sec}, ikptr @var{mtime_usec})
@deftypefunx ikptr ikrt_posix_lutimes (ikptr @var{pathname}, ikptr @var{atime_sec}, ikptr @var{atime_usec}, ikptr @var{mtime_sec}, ikptr @var{mtime_usec})
Interface to the C functions @cfunc{utimes} and @cfunc{lutimes},
@glibcref{File Times, utimes}.  Set the access and modification times of
the file system entry selected by @var{pathname}, which must be a
bytevector, to the specified counts of seconds and microseconds; all the
numeric arguments must be fixnums.  If successful return zero, else
return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_futimes (ikptr @var{fd}, ikptr @var{atime_sec}, ikptr @var{atime_usec}, ikptr @var{mtime_sec}, ikptr @var{mtime_usec})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{futimes}, @glibcref{File Times,
futimes}.  Set the access and modification times of the file system
entry associated to @var{fd}, which must be a fixnum representing a file
descriptor, to the specified counts of seconds and microseconds; all the
numeric arguments must be fixnums.  If successful return zero, else
return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun

@c page
@node capi posix link
@subsection Hard and symbolic links


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_link (ikptr @var{old_pathname}, ikptr @var{new_pathname})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{link}, @glibcref{Hard Links, link}.
Create a hard link @var{new_pathname} to the source file system entry
@var{old_pathname}.  If successful return zero, else return an encoded
@code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_symlink (ikptr @var{file_pathname}, ikptr @var{link_pathname})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{symlink}, @glibcref{Symbolic Links,
symlink}.  Create a symbolic link @var{link_pathname} to the source file
system entry @var{file_pathname}.  If successful return zero, else
return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_readlink (ikptr @var{link_pathname}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{readlink}, @glibcref{Symbolic Links,
readlink}.  If @var{pathname} references a symbolic link: follow it once
and return the referenced pathname as bytevector; if an error occurs:
return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_realpath (ikptr @var{pathname})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{realpath}, @glibcref{Symbolic Links,
realpath}.  If @var{pathname} references a symbolic link: follow it and
return the real pathname as bytevector; if an error occurs: return an
encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_unlink (ikptr @var{pathname})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{unlink}, @glibcref{Deleting Files,
unlink}.  Delete the file system entry referenced by @var{pathname},
which must be a bytevector and referencing a file.  If successful return
zero, else return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_remove (ikptr @var{pathname})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{remove}, @glibcref{Deleting Files,
remove}.  Delete the file system entry referenced by @var{pathname},
which must be a bytevector and referencing a file or directory.  If
successful return zero, else return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_rename (ikptr @var{old_pathname}, ikptr @var{new_pathname})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{rename}, @glibcref{Renaming Files,
rename}.  Rename the file system entry @var{old_pathname} to
@var{new_pathname}, both of which must be bytevectors.  If successful
return zero, else return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun

@c page
@node capi posix dir
@subsection File system directories


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_mkdir (ikptr @var{pathname}, ikptr @var{mode})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{mkdir}, @glibcref{Creating
Directories, mkdir}.  Create a new directory file system entry with name
@var{pathname}, which must be a bytevector; @var{mode} must be a fixnum
specifying access permissions.  If successful return the fixnum zero,
else return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_rmdir (ikptr @var{pathname})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{rmdir}, @glibcref{Creating
Directories, rmdir}.  Remove the directory file system entry selected by
@var{pathname}, which must be a bytevector.  If successful return the
fixnum zero, else return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_getcwd (ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{getcwd}, @glibcref{Working Directory,
getcwd}.  Acquire the pathname of the current working directory.  If
successful return a bytevector holding the pathname, else return an
encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_chdir (ikptr @var{pathname})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{chdir}, @glibcref{Working Directory,
chdir}.  Change the current working directory to the file system entry
selected by @var{pathname}, which must be a bytevector.  If successful
return the fixnum zero, else return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_fchdir (ikptr @var{fd})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{fchdir}, @glibcref{Working Directory,
fchdir}.  Change the current working directory to the file system entry
associated to @var{fd}, which must be a fixnum representing a file
descriptor.  If successful return the fixnum zero, else return an
encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_opendir (ikptr @var{pathname}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{opendir}, @glibcref{Opening a
Directory, opendir}.  Open a directory stream for the inspection of the
file system entry @var{pathname}, which must be a bytevector.  If
successful return a pointer object, else return an encoded @code{errno}
value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_fdopendir (ikptr @var{fd}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{fdopendir}, @glibcref{Opening a
Directory, fdopendir}.  Open a directory stream for the inspection of
the file system entry associated to @var{fd}, which must be a fixnum
representing a file descriptor.  If successful return a pointer object,
else return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_readdir (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{readdir}, @glibcref{Reading/Closing
Directory, readdir}.  Acquire the next entry from a directory stream
referenced by @var{pointer}, which must be a pointer object.  If
successful and an entry is available: return a pointer object; if
successful and no more entries are available: return the false object;
else return an encoded @code{errno} value.

When no more entries are available or an error occurs: the directory
stream is closed.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_closedir (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{closedir}, @glibcref{Reading/Closing
Directory, closedir}.  Close the directory stream referenced by
@var{pointer}, which must be a pointer object.  If successful return the
fixnum zero, else return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_rewinddir (ikptr @var{pointer})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{rewinddir}, @glibcref{Random Access
Directory, rewinddir}.  Rewind to the beginning the directory stream
referenced by @var{pointer}, which must be a pointer object.  Return the
void object.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_telldir (ikptr @var{pointer})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{telldir}, @glibcref{Random Access
Directory, telldir}.  Return an exact integer representing the current
position in the directory stream referenced by @var{pointer}, which must
be a pointer object.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_seekdir (ikptr @var{pointer}, ikptr @var{pos})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{seekdir}, @glibcref{Random Access
Directory, seekdir}.  Set to @var{pos} the position of the directory
stream referenced by @var{pointer}, which must be a pointer object;
@var{pos} must be the return value of a previous call to
@cfunc{telldir}.  Return the void object.
@end deftypefun

@c page
@node capi posix fd
@subsection File descriptors at low level


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_open (ikptr @var{pathname}, ikptr @var{flags}, ikptr @var{mode})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{open}, @glibcref{Opening and Closing
Files, open}.  Open a file descriptor for the file system entry
@var{pathname}, which must be a bytevector; @var{flags} and @var{mode}
must be fixnums.  If successful return a fixnum representing the file
descriptor, else return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_close (ikptr @var{fd})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{close}, @glibcref{Opening and Closing
Files, close}.  Close a file descriptor represented by @var{fd}, which
must be a fixnum.  If successful return the fixnum zero, else return an
encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_read (ikptr @var{fd}, ikptr @var{buffer}, ikptr @var{size})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{read}, @glibcref{I/O Primitives,
read}.  Read bytes from the file descriptor @var{fd} and store them in
the bytevector @var{buffer}; if @var{size} is a fixnum, read @var{size}
bytes; if @var{size} is false, read a number of bytes equal to the
length of @var{buffer}.  If successful return a non--negative fixnum
representing the number of bytes read, else return an encoded
@code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_pread (ikptr @var{fd}, ikptr @var{buffer}, ikptr @var{size}, ikptr @var{off})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{pread}, @glibcref{I/O Primitives,
pread}.  Like @cfunc{ikrt_posix_read}, but start reading at offset
@var{off} from the start of the file; @var{off} must be a non--negative
exact integer.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_write (ikptr @var{fd}, ikptr @var{buffer}, ikptr @var{size})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{write}, @glibcref{I/O Primitives,
write}.  Write bytes to the file descriptor @var{fd} from the bytevector
@var{buffer}; if @var{size} is a fixnum, write @var{size} bytes; if
@var{size} is false, write a number of bytes equal to the length of
@var{buffer}.  If successful return a non--negative fixnum representing
the number of written bytes, else return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_pwrite (ikptr @var{fd}, ikptr @var{buffer}, ikptr @var{size}, ikptr @var{off})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{pwrite}, @glibcref{I/O Primitives,
pwrite}.  Like @cfunc{ikrt_posix_write}, but start writing at offset
@var{off} from the start of the file; @var{off} must be a non--negative
exact integer.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_lseek (ikptr @var{fd}, ikptr @var{off}, ikptr @var{whence}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{lseek}, @glibcref{File Position
Primitive, lseek}.  Change the file position of the file descriptor
@var{fd} to @var{off} from @var{whence}; @var{fd} and @var{whence} must
be fixnums, @var{off} must be an exact integer.  If successful return a
non--negative exact integer representing the number of bytes from the
beginning of the file, else return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_readv (ikptr @var{fd}, ikptr @var{buffers}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{readv}, @glibcref{Scatter-Gather,
readv}.  Read bytes from the file descriptor @var{fd} and store them
into the list of bytevectors referenced by @var{buffers}.  If successful
return a non--negative exact integer representing the number of bytes
actually read, else return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_writev (ikptr @var{fd}, ikptr @var{buffers}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{writev}, @glibcref{Scatter-Gather,
writev}.  Write bytes to the file descriptor @var{fd} from the list of
bytevectors referenced by @var{buffers}.  If successful return a
non--negative exact integer representing the number of bytes actually
written, else return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_select (ikptr @var{nfds}, ikptr @var{read_fds}, ikptr @var{write_fds}, ikptr @var{except_fds}, ikptr @var{sec}, ikptr @var{usec}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{select}, @glibcref{Waiting for I/O,
select}.  Wait for read, write or exceptional events on selected lists
of file descriptors.

@var{nfds} must be false or a non--negative fixnum, when false it
defaults to the maximum file descriptor value in the given lists; it is
the maximum file descriptor number in the sets to be checked for events,
plus one.  @var{read_fds}, @var{write_fds} and @var{except_fds} must be
nil or lists of file descriptors to be checked for events.  @var{sec}
and @var{usec} must be fixnums representing timeout seconds and
microseconds.

Return the fixnum zero if the timeout expired before any event arrived;
else return a vector of 3 elements being lists of file descriptors,
respectively, ready for reading, writing or an exceptional condition.
If an error occurs: return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_select_fd (ikptr @var{fd}, ikptr @var{sec}, ikptr @var{usec}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{select}, @glibcref{Waiting for I/O,
select}.  Wait for read, write or exceptional events on the single file
descriptor @var{fd}.  @var{sec} and @var{usec} must be fixnums
representing timeout seconds and microseconds.

Return the fixnum zero if the timeout expired before any event arrived;
else return a fixnum being the OR combination of the flags: @code{1} if
@var{fd} is readable, @code{2} if @var{fd} is writable, @code{4} if
@var{fd} received an exception.  If an error occurs: return an encoded
@code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_fcntl (ikptr @var{fd}, ikptr @var{command}, ikptr @var{arg})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{fcntl}, @glibcref{Control Operations,
fcntl}.  Perform the operation specified by @var{command} on the file
descriptor @var{fd} using @var{arg}; @var{fd} and @var{command} must be
fixnums; @var{arg} must be the false object, a fixnum, a bytevector or a
pointer, if it is @false{} no argument is handed to @cfunc{fcntl}.  If
successful return a fixnum representing the return value of
@cfunc{fcntl}, else return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_ioctl (ikptr @var{fd}, ikptr @var{command}, ikptr @var{arg})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{ioctl}, @glibcref{IOCTLs, ioctl}.
Perform the operation specified by @var{command} on the file descriptor
@var{fd} using @var{arg}; @var{fd} and @var{command} must be fixnums;
@var{arg} must be the false object, a fixnum, a bytevector or a pointer,
if it is @false{} no argument is handed to @cfunc{ioctl}.  If successful
return a fixnum representing the return value of @cfunc{ioctl}, else
return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_dup (ikptr @var{fd})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{dup}, @glibcref{Duplicating
Descriptors, dup}.  Duplicate the file descriptor @var{fd}.  If
successful return a non--negative fixnum representing the new
descriptor, else return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_dup2 (ikptr @var{old}, ikptr @var{new})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{dup2}, @glibcref{Duplicating
Descriptors, dup}.  Duplicate the file descriptor @var{old} to
@var{new}.  If successful return the fixnum zero, else return an encoded
@code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_pipe (ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{pipe}, @glibcref{Creating a Pipe,
pipe}.  Create a pair of file descriptors connected through a pipe.  If
successful return a pair whose car and cdr are fixnums representing the
file descriptors, else return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_mkfifo (ikptr @var{pathname}, ikptr @var{mode})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{mkfifo}, @glibcref{FIFO Special
Files, mkfifo}.  Create a FIFO special file with name @var{pathname},
which must be a bytevector, and mode @var{mode}, which must be a fixnum.
If successful return the fixnum zero, else return an encoded
@code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun

@c page
@node capi posix socket
@subsection Network sockets


@subsubheading Address structures

@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_make_sockaddr_un (ikptr @var{pathname}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Given a bytevector @var{pathname} representing the pathname of a local
socket, build and return a bytevector holding the @code{struct
sockaddr_un} representing it.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_sockaddr_un_pathname (ikptr @var{socket_address}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Given a bytevector @var{socket_address}, which must be the return value
of a previous call to @cfunc{ikrt_posix_make_sockaddr_un}, holding a
@code{struct sockaddr_un} build and return a bytevector holding the
corresponding socket pathname.  If the data in @var{socket_address} is
invalid: return false.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_make_sockaddr_in (ikptr @var{host_address}, ikptr @var{port}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Given a bytevector @var{host_address} holding a @code{struct in_addr}
and a fixnum @var{port} representing a network port number, build and
return a bytevector holding a @code{struct sockaddr_in} initialised with
this data.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_sockaddr_in_in_addr (ikptr @var{socket_address}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
@deftypefunx ikptr ikrt_posix_sockaddr_in_in_port (ikptr @var{socket_address})
Given a bytevector @var{socket_address} holding a @code{struct
sockaddr_in}, extract the @code{in_addr} and @code{in_port} fields and
return them as bytevector holding the corresponding @code{struct
in_addr} and as fixnum.  If the data in @var{socket_address} is invalid:
return false.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_make_sockaddr_in6 (ikptr @var{host_address}, ikptr @var{port}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Given a bytevector @var{host_address} holding a @code{struct in6_addr}
and a fixnum @var{port} representing a network port number, build and
return a bytevector holding a @code{struct sockaddr_in6} initialised
with this data.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_sockaddr_in6_in6_addr (ikptr @var{socket_address}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
@deftypefunx ikptr ikrt_posix_sockaddr_in6_in6_port (ikptr @var{socket_address})
Given a bytevector @var{socket_address} holding a @code{struct
sockaddr_in6}, extract the @code{in6_addr} and @code{in6_port} fields
and return them as bytevector holding the corresponding @code{struct
in6_addr} and as fixnum.  If the data in @var{socket_address} is
invalid: return false.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_in6addr_loopback (ikpcb * @var{pcb})
@deftypefunx ikptr ikrt_posix_in6addr_any (ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Build and return a bytevector holding the constant structures of type
@code{struct in6_addr} defined by @code{in6addr_loopback} and
@code{in6addr_any}.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_inet_aton (ikptr @var{dotted_quad}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Given the bytevector @var{dotted_quad} holding the @ascii{} dotted quad
representation of a host address, build and return a bytevector holding
the corresponding @code{struct in_addr}.  If @var{dotted_quad} is
invalid: return false.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_inet_ntoa (ikptr @var{host_address}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Given the bytevector @var{host_address} holding a @code{struct in_addr},
build and return a bytevector holding the corresponding @ascii{} dotted
quad representation.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_inet_pton (ikptr @var{af}, ikptr @var{presentation}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Given the fixnum @var{af}, being @code{AF_INET} or @code{AF_INET6}, and
the bytevector @var{presentation} holding the @ascii{} presentation of
an Internet address, build and return a bytevector holding the
corresponding @code{struct in_addr} or @code{struct in6_addr}.  If
either @var{af} or @var{presentation} is invalid: return false.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_inet_ntop (ikptr @var{af}, ikptr @var{host_address}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Given the fixnum @var{af}, being @code{AF_INET} or @code{AF_INET6}, and
the bytevector @var{host_address} holding a @code{struct in_addr} or
@code{struct in6_addr}, build and return a bytevector holding the
corresponding @ascii{} presentation of the Internet address .  If the
arguments are invalid: return false.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Host address resolution


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_gethostbyname (ikptr @var{rtd}, ikptr @var{hostname}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{gethostbyname}, @glibcref{Host Names,
gethostbyname}.  Given the bytevector @var{hostname} holding the
@ascii{} representation of a host name, build and return an instance of
@code{struct-hostent} using @var{rtd} as its type descriptor.  If an
error occurs, return an encoded @code{h_errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_gethostbyaddr (ikptr @var{rtd}, ikptr @var{addr}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{gethostbyaddr}, @glibcref{Host Names,
gethostbyaddr}.  Given the bytevector @var{addr} holding a @code{struct
in_addr} or a @code{struct in6_addr}, build and return an instance of
@code{struct-hostent} using @var{rtd} as its type descriptor; the type
of address is automatically inferred from the length of the bytevector.
If an error occurs, return an encoded @code{h_errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_host_entries (ikptr @var{rtd}, ikpcb * pcb)
Interface to the C functions @cfunc{sethostent}, @cfunc{gethostent} and
@cfunc{endhostent}, @glibcref{Host Names, gethostbyaddr}.  Build and
return a list of @code{struct-hostent} representing the entries in the
hosts database, using @var{rtd} as type descriptor.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_getaddrinfo (ikptr @var{rtd}, ikptr @var{node}, ikptr @var{service}, ikptr @var{hints}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{getaddrinfo}, see the manual page
@code{getaddrinfo(3)}.  Given the bytevectors @var{node} and
@var{service} identifying an Internet host and a service, build a list
of @code{struct-addrinfo} instances representing addresses to which
sockets can be bound or connected.

Both @var{node} and @var{service} can be false, in which case the
corresponding arguments handed to the C function are @code{NULL}.

@var{hints} must be an instance of @code{struct-addrinfo} used to select
matching hosts.  @var{rtd} must be the type descriptor of
@code{struct-addrinfo}.

If successful: return the list of data structures, else return a fixnum
representing an @code{EAI_} error code.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_gai_strerror (ikptr @var{error_code}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{gai_strerror}, see the manual page
@code{gai_strerror(3)}.  Convert a @code{EAI_} error code into the
corresponding error message, return a bytevector holding such message in
@ascii{} coding.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Network protocols


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_getprotobyname (ikptr @var{rtd}, ikptr @var{name}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{getprotobyname}, @glibcref{Protocols
Database, getprotobyname}.  Given a bytevector @var{name} holding the
@ascii{} coding of a network protocol name, query the network protocols
database and build an instance of @code{struct-protoent} mirroring the
resulting @code{struct protoent} entry; @var{rtd} must be the type
descriptor of @code{struct-protoent}.  If successful return the data
structure, else return false.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_getprotobynumber (ikptr @var{rtd}, ikptr @var{proto_num}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{getprotobynumber},
@glibcref{Protocols Database, getprotobynumber}.  Given a fixnum
@var{proto_num} being the number of a network protocol, query the
network protocols database and build an instance of
@code{struct-protoent} mirroring the resulting @code{struct protoent}
entry; @var{rtd} must be the type descriptor of @code{struct-protoent}.
If successful return the data structure, else return false.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_protocol_entries (ikptr @var{rtd}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C functions @cfunc{setprotoent}, @cfunc{getprotoent}
and @cfunc{endprotoent}, @glibcref{Protocols Database, setprotoent}.
Scan the network protocol database and build a list of
@code{struct-protoent} mirroring the resulting @code{struct protoent}
entries; @var{rtd} must be the type descriptor of
@code{struct-protoent}.  Return the list of structures.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Network services


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_getservbyname (ikptr @var{rtd}, ikptr @var{name}, ikptr @var{protocol}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{getservbyname}, @glibcref{Services
Database, getservbyname}.  Given the bytevectors @var{name} and
@var{protocol} holding the @ascii{} coding of a network service name and
protocol, query the network services database and build an instance of
@code{struct-servent} mirroring the resulting @code{struct servent}
entry.  @var{rtd} must be the type descriptor of @code{struct-servent}.
If successful return the data structure, else return false.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_getservbynumber (ikptr @var{rtd}, ikptr @var{port}, ikptr @var{protocol}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{getservbynumber}, @glibcref{Services
Database, getservbynumber}.  Given a fixnum @var{port} and a string or
bytevector @var{protocol} being the port number and protocol name of a
network service, query the network services database and build an
instance of @code{struct-servent} mirroring the resulting @code{struct
servent} entry.  @var{rtd} must be the type descriptor of
@code{struct-servent}.  If successful return the data structure, else
return false.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_service_entries (ikptr @var{rtd}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C functions @cfunc{setservent}, @cfunc{getservent} and
@cfunc{endservent}, @glibcref{Services Database, setservent}.  Scan the
network service database and build a list of @code{struct-servent}
mirroring the resulting @code{struct servent} entries.  @var{rtd} must
be the type descriptor of @code{struct-servent}.  Return the list of
structures.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Networks database


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_getnetbyname (ikptr @var{rtd}, ikptr @var{name}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{getnetbyname}, @glibcref{Networks
Database, getnetbyname}.  Given the bytevector @var{name} holding the
@ascii{} coding of a network name, query the networks database and build
an instance of @code{struct-netent} mirroring the resulting @code{struct
netent} entry.  @var{rtd} must be the type descriptor of
@code{struct-netent}.  If successful return the data structure, else
return false.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_getnetbyaddr (ikptr @var{rtd}, ikptr @var{net}, ikptr @var{type}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{getnetbyaddr}, @glibcref{Networks
Database, getnetbyaddr}.  Given an exact integer @var{net} representing
a network number and the fixnum @var{type} representing a network type,
query the networks database and build an instance of
@code{struct-netent} mirroring the resulting @code{struct netent} entry.
@var{rtd} must be the type descriptor of @code{struct-netent}.  If
successful return the data structure, else return false.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_network_entries (ikptr @var{rtd}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C functions @cfunc{setnetent}, @cfunc{getnetent} and
@cfunc{endnetent}, @glibcref{Networks Database, setnetent}.  Scan the
networks database and build a list of @code{struct-netent} mirroring the
resulting @code{struct netent} entries.  @var{rtd} must be the type
descriptor of @code{struct-netent}.  Return the list of structures.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Sockets creation and shutdown


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_socket (ikptr @var{namespace}, ikptr @var{style}, ikptr @var{protocol})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{socket}, @glibcref{Creating a Socket,
socket}.  Create a new socket descriptor and return it as non--negative
fixnum; if an error occurs return an encoded @code{errno} value.  All
the arguments must be fixnums.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_shutdown (ikptr @var{sock}, ikptr @var{how})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{shutdown}, @glibcref{Closing a
Socket, shutdown}.  Close the socket @var{sock} according to @var{how}.
If successful return the fixnum zero, else return an encoded
@code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_socketpair (ikptr @var{namespace}, ikptr @var{style}, ikptr @var{protocol}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{socketpair}, @glibcref{Socket Pairs,
socketpair}.  Create a pairs of connected sockets and return a pair
holding the descriptors as non--negative fixnums; if an error occurs
return an encoded @code{errno} value.  All the arguments must be
fixnums, but @var{pcb}.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Socket operations


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_connect (ikptr @var{sock}, ikptr @var{addr})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{connect}, @glibcref{Connecting,
connect}.  Connect the socket @var{sock} to the address specified by the
bytevector @var{addr} which must hold a concrete instance of
@code{struct sockaddr}.  If successful return the fixnum zero, else
return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_listen (ikptr @var{sock}, ikptr @var{pending_conns})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{listen}, @glibcref{Listening,
listen}.  Enable the socket @var{sock} to accept connections; the fixnum
@var{pending_conns} specifies the maximum length of the pending
connection requests queue.  If successful return the fixnum zero, else
return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_accept (ikptr @var{sock}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{accept}, @glibcref{Accepting
Connections, accept}.  Accept an incoming connection to the server
socket @var{sock}.  If successful return a pair whose car is a
non--negative fixnum representing the socket and whose cdr is a
bytevector representing the client address as @code{struct sockaddr};
else return an encoded @code{errno} value, including @code{EWOULDBLOCK}
which means that @var{sock} is in non--blocking mode and no pending
connections exist.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_bind (ikptr @var{sock}, ikptr @var{sockaddr})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{bind}, @glibcref{Setting Address,
bind}.  Bind the socket descriptor @var{sock} to the address specified
by the @code{struct sockaddr} in the bytevector @var{sockaddr}.  If
successful return the fixnum zero, else return an encoded @code{errno}
value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_getpeername (ikptr @var{sock}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{getpeername}, @glibcref{Who is
Connected, getpeername}.  Retrieve informations about the address of the
socket to which the @var{sock} socket is connected to.  If successful
return a bytevector holding a @code{struct sockaddr}, else return an
encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_getsockname (ikptr @var{sock}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{getsockanme}, @glibcref{Setting
Address, getsockname}.  Retrieve informations about the address bound to
the socket descriptor @var{sock}.  If successful return a bytevector
holding the @code{struct sockaddr}, else return an encoded @code{errno}
value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_send (ikptr @var{sock}, ikptr @var{buffer}, ikptr @var{size}, ikptr @var{flags})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{send}, @glibcref{Sending Data, send}.
Like @cfunc{write} but with the additional argument @var{flags} which
must be a fixnum: write data from the bytevector @var{buffer} to the
socket @var{sock}; if @var{size} is a fixnum, write @var{size} bytes; if
@var{size} is false, write a number of bytes equal to the length of
@var{buffer}.  If successful return a non--negative fixnum representing
the number of bytes actually sent, else return an encoded @code{errno}
value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_recv (ikptr @var{sock}, ikptr @var{buffer}, ikptr @var{size}, ikptr @var{flags})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{recv}, @glibcref{Receiving Data,
recv}.  Like @cfunc{read} but with the additional argument @var{flags}
which must be a fixnum: read data from @var{sock} and store it in the
bytevector @var{buffer}; if @var{size} is a fixnum, read @var{size}
bytes; if @var{size} is false, read a number of bytes equal to the
length of @var{buffer}.  If successful return a non--negative fixnum
representing the number of bytes actually received, else return an
encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_sendto (ikptr @var{sock}, ikptr @var{buffer}, ikptr @var{size}, ikptr @var{flags}, ikptr @var{addr})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{sendto}, @glibcref{Sending Datagrams,
sendto}.  Like @cfunc{send} but with the additional argument @var{addr}
which must be a bytevector holding a @code{struct sockaddr}: write data
from the bytevector @var{buffer} to the socket @var{sock} to the
destination specified by @var{addr}.

If @var{size} is a fixnum, write @var{size} bytes; if @var{size} is
false, write a number of bytes equal to the length of @var{buffer}.

If successful return a non--negative fixnum representing the number of
bytes actually sent, else return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_recvfrom (ikptr @var{sock}, ikptr @var{buffer}, ikptr @var{size}, ikptr @var{flags}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{recvfrom}, @glibcref{Receiving
Datagrams, recvfrom}.  Like @cfunc{recv} but additionally retrieve
informations about the address of the sender: read data from @var{sock}
and store it in the bytevector @var{buffer}.

If @var{size} is a fixnum, read @var{size} bytes; if @var{size} is
false, read a number of bytes equal to the length of @var{buffer}.

If successful return a pair whose car is a non--negative fixnum
representing the number of bytes actually received and whose cdr is a
bytevector holding a @code{struct sockaddr} representing the address of
the sender; else return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_getsockopt (ikptr @var{sock}, ikptr @var{level}, ikptr @var{option}, ikptr @var{optval}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{getsockopt}, @glibcref{Socket Option
Function, getsockopt}.  Retrieve the value of @var{option} of socket
@var{sock} at @var{level} and store it in the bytevector @var{optval}.
@var{option} and @var{level} must be fixnums.  If successful return the
fixnum zero, else return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_setsockopt (ikptr @var{sock}, ikptr @var{level}, ikptr @var{option}, ikptr @var{optval}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{setsockopt}, @glibcref{Socket Option
Function, setsockopt}.  Set a new value for @var{option} of socket
@var{sock} at @var{level} reading it from the bytevector @var{optval}.
@var{option} and @var{level} must be fixnums.  If successful return the
fixnum zero, else return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun

@c page
@node capi posix users
@subsection Users and groups


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_getuid (void)
Interface to the C function @cfunc{getuid}, @glibcref{Reading Persona,
getuid}.  Return a fixnum representing the real user ID of the process.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_getgid (void)
Interface to the C function @cfunc{getgid}, @glibcref{Reading Persona,
getgid}.  Return a fixnum representing the real group ID of the process.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_geteuid (void)
Interface to the C function @cfunc{geteuid}, @glibcref{Reading Persona,
geteuid}.  Return a fixnum representing the effective user ID of the
process.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_getegid (void)
Interface to the C function @cfunc{getegid}, @glibcref{Reading Persona,
getegid}.  Return a fixnum representing the effective group ID of the
process.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_getgroups (ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{getgroups}, @glibcref{Reading
Persona, getgroups}.  Return a list of fixnums representing the
supplementary group IDs of the process; if an error occurs return an
encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_seteuid (ikptr @var{new_uid})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{seteuid}, @glibcref{Setting User ID,
seteuid}.  Set the effective user ID to @var{new_uid}, which must be a
fixnum.  If successful return the fixnum zero, else return an encoded
@code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_setuid (ikptr @var{new_uid})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{setuid}, @glibcref{Setting User ID,
setuid}.  Set both the real and effective user IDs to @var{new_uid},
which must be a fixnum.  If successful return the fixnum zero, else
return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_setreuid (ikptr @var{real_uid}, ikptr @var{effective_uid})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{setreuid}, @glibcref{Setting User ID,
setreuid}.  Set the real user ID to @var{real_uid} and the effective
user ID to @var{effective_uid}, both the arguments must be fixnums.  If
successful return the fixnum zero, else return an encoded @code{errno}
value.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_setegid (ikptr @var{new_gid})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{setegid}, @glibcref{Setting Groups,
setegid}.  Set the effective group ID to @var{new_gid}, which must be a
fixnum.  If successful return the fixnum zero, else return an encoded
@code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_setgid (ikptr @var{new_gid})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{setgid}, @glibcref{Setting Groups,
setgid}.  Set both the real and effective group IDs to @var{new_gid},
which must be a fixnum.  If successful return the fixnum zero, else
return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_setregid (ikptr @var{real_gid}, ikptr @var{effective_gid})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{setregid}, @glibcref{Setting Groups,
setregid}.  Set the real group ID to @var{real_gid} and the effective
group ID to @var{effective_gid}, both the arguments must be fixnums.  If
successful return the fixnum zero, else return an encoded @code{errno}
value.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_getlogin (ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{getlogin}, @glibcref{Who Logged In,
getlogin}.  Return a bytevector holding the @ascii{} coding of the name
of the user logged in on the controlling terminal of the process; if the
name cannot be determined: return false.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_getpwuid (ikptr @var{rtd}, ikptr @var{uid}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{getpwuid}, @glibcref{Lookup User,
getpwuid}.  Retrieve informations on the user with identifier @var{uid},
which must be a fixnum.  If successful return an instance of
@code{struct-passwd} initialised with @var{rtd}, which must be its type
descriptor; if a user with such an ID does not exists: return false.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_getpwnam (ikptr @var{rtd}, ikptr @var{name}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{getpwnam}, @glibcref{Lookup User,
getpwnam}.  Retrieve informations on the user with name represented in
@ascii{} coding by the bytevector @var{name}.  If successful return an
instance of @code{struct-passwd} initialised with @var{rtd}, which must
be its type descriptor; if a user with such an ID does not exists:
return false.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_user_entries (ikptr @var{rtd}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C functions @cfunc{setpwent}, @cfunc{getpwent} and
@cfunc{endpwent}, @glibcref{Scanning All Users, setpwent}.  Iterate the
database of users and return a list of @code{struct-passwd} representing
the entries; the structures are initialised with @var{rtd} which must be
the type descriptor of @code{struct-passwd}.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_getgrgid (ikptr @var{rtd}, ikptr @var{gid}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{getgrgid}, @glibcref{Lookup Group,
getgrgid}.  Retrieve informations on the group with identifier
@var{gid}, which must be a fixnum.  If successful return an instance of
@code{struct-group} initialised with @var{rtd}, which must be its type
descriptor; if a group with such an ID does not exists: return false.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_getgrnam (ikptr @var{rtd}, ikptr @var{name}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{getgrnam}, @glibcref{Lookup Group,
getgrnam}.  Retrieve informations on the group with name represented in
@ascii{} coding by the bytevector @var{name}.  If successful return an
instance of @code{struct-group} initialised with @var{rtd}, which must
be its type descriptor; if a group with such an ID does not exists:
return false.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_group_entries (ikptr @var{rtd}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C functions @cfunc{setgrent}, @cfunc{getgrent} and
@cfunc{endgrent}, @glibcref{Scanning All Groups, setgrent}.  Iterate the
database of groups and return a list of @code{struct-group} representing
the entries; the structures are initialised with @var{rtd} which must be
the type descriptor of @code{struct-group}.
@end deftypefun

@c page
@node capi posix job
@subsection Job control


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_ctermid (ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{ctermid}, @glibcref{Identifying the
Terminal, ctermid}.  Return a bytevector holding the @ascii{} coded
pathname of the controlling terminal of the current process; the
returned value may be the empty bytevector.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_setsid (void)
Interface to the C function @cfunc{setsid}, @glibcref{Process Group
Functions, setsid}.  Create a new session, making the current process
the group leader with no controlling terminal.  If successful return a
fixnum representing the new process groups ID, else return an encoded
@code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_getsid (ikptr @var{pid})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{getsid}, @glibcref{Process Group
Functions, getsid}.  If successful return a fixnum representing the
session ID of the process with process ID @var{pid}, which must be a
fixnum; else return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_getpgrp (void)
Interface to the C function @cfunc{getpgrp}, @glibcref{Process Group
Functions, getpgrp}.  Return a fixnum representing the process group ID
of the calling process.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_setpgid (ikptr @var{pid}, ikptr @var{pgid})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{setpgid}, @glibcref{Process Group
Functions, setpgid}.  Put the process @var{pid} in the process group
@var{pgid}.  If successful return the fixnum zero, else return an
encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_tcgetpgrp (ikptr @var{fd})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{tcgetpgrp}, @glibcref{Terminal Access
Functions, tcgetpgrp}.  If successful return a fixnum representing the
process group ID of the foreground process group associated with the
terminal open on descriptor @var{fd}, which must be a fixnum; else
return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_tcsetpgrp (ikptr @var{fd}, ikptr @var{pgid})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{tcsetpgrp}, @glibcref{Terminal Access
Functions, tcsetpgrp}.  Set to process group ID @var{pgid} the
foreground process group for the terminal open on descriptor @var{fd};
both the arguments must be fixnums.  If successful return the fixnum
zero, else return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_tcgetsid (ikptr @var{fd})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{tcgetsid}, @glibcref{Terminal Access
Functions, tcgetsid}.  If successful return a fixnum representing the
process group ID of the session for which the terminal open on
descriptor @var{fd} is the controlling terminal; else return an encoded
@code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun

@c page
@node capi posix time
@subsection Date and time


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_clock (ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{clock}, @glibcref{CPU Time, clock}.
If successful return an @strong{inexact} integer representing the CPU
time for the calling process expressed in clock ticks; if the clock time
is not available return false.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_times (ikptr @var{rtd}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{times}, @glibcref{Processor Time,
times}.  If successful return an instance of @code{struct-tms}
representing the current processor time with all the fields set to
inexact integers, else return false; @var{rtd} must be the type
descriptor of @code{struct-tms}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_time (ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{time}, @glibcref{Simple Calendar
Time, time}.  If successful return the calendar time as an
@strong{inexact} integer, else return false.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_gettimeofday (ikptr @var{rtd}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{gettimeofday},
@glibcref{High-Resolution Calendar, gettimeofday}.  Acquire the current
time.  If successful return an instance of @code{struct-timeval}, else
return an encoded @code{errno} value.  @var{rtd} must be the type
descriptor of @code{struct-timeval}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_localtime (ikptr @var{rtd}, ikptr @var{time}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{localtime}, @glibcref{Broken-down
Time, localtime}.  Given an exact integer @var{time} representing the
local time as returned by the @func{time} function: build and return an
instance of @code{struct-tm} representing the same time in human
readable form; if an error occurs return false.  @var{rtd} must be the
type descriptor of @code{struct-tm}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_gmtime (ikptr @var{rtd}, ikptr @var{time}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{gmtime}, @glibcref{Broken-down Time,
gmtime}.  Given an exact integer @var{time} representing the @utc{} time
as returned by the @func{time} function: build and return an instance of
@code{struct-tm} representing the same time in human readable form; if
an error occurs return false.  @var{rtd} must be the type descriptor of
@code{struct-tm}.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_timelocal (ikptr @var{tm}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{timelocal}, @glibcref{Broken-down
Time, timelocal}.  Given a reference to a @code{struct-rm}, @var{tm},
representing a local broken time, convert it into a time value as
returned by @cfunc{time}.  If successful return an @strong{inexact}
integer representing the time value, else return false.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_timegm (ikptr @var{tm}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{timegm}, @glibcref{Broken-down Time,
timegm}.  Given a reference to a @code{struct-rm}, @var{tm},
representing a @utc{} broken time, convert it into a time value as
returned by @cfunc{time}.  If successful return an @strong{inexact}
integer representing the time value, else return false.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_posix_strftime (ikptr @var{template}, ikptr @var{tm}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{strftime}, @glibcref{Formatting
Calendar Time, strftime}.  Given a bytevector @var{template} holding an
@ascii{} coded format string and a @code{struct-tm} instance @var{tm}:
build a formatted time string; the resulting time string can be at most
@math{4096} bytes wide.  If successful return a bytevector holding the
time string in @ascii{} coding, else return false.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_nanosleep (ikptr @var{secs}, ikptr @var{nsecs})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{nanosleep}, @glibcref{Sleeping,
nanosleep}.  Halt the current process for the specified amount of time.

The count of seconds @var{secs} must be an exact integer in the range
@math{[0, 2^32)}; the count of nanoseconds @var{nsecs} must be an exact
integer in the range @math{[0, 999999999]}.

If successful and the requested time is elapsed: return a pair whose car
is false and whose cdr is false.  If successful and the sleeping was
interrupted by an interprocess signal: return a pair whose car is an
exact integer representing the count of remaining seconds and whose cdr
is an exact integer representing the count of remaining nanoseconds.  If
an error occurs return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_current_time (ikptr @var{time})
Interface to the @cfunc{gettimeofday} C function.
@glibcref{High-Resolution Calendar, gettimeofday}.  Retrieve the current
time.  @var{time} must reference a @code{time} internal structure, which
is filled with three values: megaseconds, seconds and microseconds.
Always return @var{time} itself.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_gmt_offset (ikptr @var{time})
Compute the offset in seconds between the local time and the
@acronym{UTC} time.  @var{time} must reference a @code{time} internal
structure, already filled with megaseconds, seconds and microseconds.
Return a fixnum representing the offset.
@end deftypefun


@c page
@node capi linux
@section C language level @gnu{}+Linux interface


@menu
* capi linux status::           Process termination status.
@end menu

@c page
@node capi linux status
@subsection Process termination status


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_linux_waitid (ikptr @var{idtype}, ikptr @var{id}, ikptr @var{info}, ikptr @var{options})
Interface to the Linux specific C function @cfunc{waitid}, see the
@cfunc{waitid} manual page for details.  Wait for the termination of one
or more child processes with finer control of @cfunc{waitpid}.  The
arguments @var{idtype}, @var{id} and @var{options} must be fixnums.
@var{info} must be a reference to a structure of type
@code{struct-siginfo_t}, @ref{linux status} for details.  If successful:
return @var{info} itself, else raise an exception.
@end deftypefun


The following functions accept as argument a fixnum representing the
process termination status, for example the return value of
@cfunc{system} or the status acquired by @cfunc{waitpid}.


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_linux_WIFCONTINUED (ikptr @var{status})
Interface to the Linux specific C macro @cfunc{WIFCONTINUED}.  Return
true if the process was resumed by delivery of @code{SIGCONT}.
@end deftypefun

@c page
@node capi glibc
@section C language level @gnu{} C Library interface


@menu
* capi glibc env::              Operating system environment variables.
* capi glibc dir::              File system directories.
* capi glibc temp::             Temporary files and directories.
* capi glibc sync::             File system synchronisation.
* capi glibc socket::           Network sockets.
@end menu

@c page
@node capi glibc env
@subsection Operating system environment variables


@deftypefun ikrt ikrt_glibc_clearenv (void)
Interface to the C function @cfunc{clearenv}, @glibcref{Environment
Access, clearenv}.  Remove all the entries from the environment.  Return
the void object.
@end deftypefun

@c page
@node capi glibc dir
@subsection File system directories


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_glibc_dirfd (ikptr @var{pointer})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{dirfd}, @glibcref{Opening a
Directory, dirfd}.  Acquire a file descriptor associated to the
directory entry referenced by @var{pointer}, which must be a pointer
object to a directory entry.  If successful return a fixnum representing
the file descriptor, else return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun

@c page
@node capi glibc temp
@subsection Temporary files and directories


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_glibc_mkstemp (ikptr @var{template}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{mkstemp}, @glibcref{Temporary Files,
mkstemp}.  Create a temporary file, open it and open a file descriptor
for reading and writing.  @var{template} must be a mutable bytevector
holding a template pathname on entering and the actual pathname on
returning.  If successful return a file descriptor, else return an
encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_glibc_mkdtemp (ikptr @var{template}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{mkdtemp}, @glibcref{Temporary Files,
mkdtemp}.  Create a temporary directory for reading and writing.
@var{template} must be a mutable bytevector holding a template pathname
on entering and the actual pathname on returning.  If successful return
@var{template} itself, else return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun

@c page
@node capi glibc sync
@subsection File system synchronisation


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_glibc_sync (void)
Interface to the C function @cfunc{sync}, @glibcref{Synchronizing I/O}.
Flush kernel buffer data and meta informations to the file system
devices.  If successful return the fixnum zero, else return an encoded
@code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_glibc_fsync (ikptr @var{fd})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{fsync}, @glibcref{Synchronizing I/O}.
Flush kernel buffer data and meta informations to the file system device
for the file descriptor @var{fd}.  If successful return the fixnum zero,
else return an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_glibc_fdatasync (ikptr @var{fd})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{fdatasync}, @glibcref{Synchronizing
I/O}.  Flush kernel buffer data to the file system device for the file
descriptor @var{fd}.  If successful return the fixnum zero, else return
an encoded @code{errno} value.
@end deftypefun

@c page
@node capi glibc socket
@subsection Network sockets


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_glibc_if_nametoindex (ikptr @var{name})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{if_nametoindex}, @glibcref{Interface
Naming, if_nametoindex}.  Convert a string representing a network
interface to the corresponding internal index.  @var{name} must be a
bytevector holding the @utf{}-8 representation of the string.  Return a
fixnum representing the index or false if @var{name} is invalid.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_glibc_if_indextoname (ikptr @var{index}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{if_indextoname}, @glibcref{Interface
Naming, if_indextoname}.  Convert the index associated to an interface
to the corresponding string name.  @var{index} must be a fixnum
representing the index.  Return a bytevector holding the name or false
if @var{index} is invalid.
@end deftypefun


@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_glibc_if_nameindex (ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{if_nameindex}, @glibcref{Interface
Naming, if_nameindex}.  Build and return an association list having
fixnums as keys and bytevectors as values; the fixnums are the interface
indexes, the bytevectors are the corresponding interface names.
@end deftypefun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@deftypefun ikptr ikrt_glibc_gethostbyname2 (ikptr @var{rtd}, ikptr @var{hostname}, ikptr @var{addrtype}, ikpcb * @var{pcb})
Interface to the C function @cfunc{gethostbyname2}, @glibcref{Host
Names, gethostbyname2}.  Like @cfunc{ikrt_posix_gethostbyname} but
allows the selection of the address type with @var{addrtype} which must
be @code{AF_INET} or @code{AF_INET6}.
@end deftypefun

@c end of file
