@node srfi error-reporting
@section @ansrfi{23} error reporting mechanism


@cindex @srfi{} error-reporting


The library @library{srfi :23} is by Stephan Houben as the reference
implementation for @ansrfi{23}; see:

@center @url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-23/srfi-23.html}

@noindent
for more details.

@menu
* srfi error-reporting license::   Error-reporting document
                                   license.
* srfi error-reporting abstract::  Abstract.
* srfi error-reporting rationale:: Rationale.
* srfi error-reporting spec::      Specification.
@end menu

@c page
@node srfi error-reporting license
@subsection Error--reporting document license


Copyright @copyright{} 2001 Stephan Houben @email{stephanh@@win.tue.nl}.
All Rights Reserved.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

@c page
@node srfi error-reporting abstract
@subsection Abstract


A mechanism is proposed to allow Scheme code to report errors and abort
execution.  The proposed mechanism is already implemented in several
Scheme systems and can be implemented, albeit imperfectly, in any
@rnrs{5} conforming Scheme.

@c page
@node srfi error-reporting rationale
@subsection Rationale


@rnrs{5} Scheme requires certain operations to signal an error when they
fail.  ``Signalling an error'' means that implementations must detect
and report the error.  Moreover, @rnrs{5} encourages, but not requires,
implementations to signal an error in many more circumstances.

However, there is no direct way for the Scheme application programmer to
report an error that occured in his or her own application.  This means
that Scheme procedures created by applications or libraries are in this
respect not on equal footing with procedures provided by the Scheme
system.

Many Scheme systems already provide a mechanism that allows application
code to report an error.  At least the following implementations support
such a mechanism: Bigloo, Guile, @acronym{MIT} Scheme, @acronym{PLT}
Scheme, RScheme, Scsh, SCM, all implementations supported by Slib.  Of
these implementations, the following have an error mechanism compatible
with this @srfi{}: Guile, @acronym{MIT} Scheme, @acronym{PLT} Scheme,
RScheme, Scsh.  The implementation in Slib has a different name than the
one proposed in this @srfi{}.

To summarise, many implementations already have the error reporting
mechanism described in this @srfi{} and others are easily made
compatible with this @srfi{}.  This shows that the proposed mechanism
is considered useful and that it is easy to implement in most major
implementations.

@c page
@node srfi error-reporting spec
@subsection Specification


@defun error @var{reason} [@var{arg1} [@var{arg2} ...]])
The argument @var{reason} should be a string.  The procedure error will
signal an error, as described in @rnrs{5}, and it will report the
message @var{reason} and the objects @var{arg1}, @var{arg2}, ...

What exactly constitutes ``signalling'' and ``reporting'' is not
prescribed, because of the large variation in Scheme systems.  So it is
left to the implementor to do something reasonable.  To that end, a few
examples of possible behaviour are given.

@enumerate
@item
Display @var{reason} and @var{arg1}... on the screen and terminate the
Scheme program.  This might be suitable for a Scheme system implemented
as a batch compiler.

@item
Display @var{reason} and @var{arg1}... on the screen and go back to the
read--evaluate--print loop.  This might be suitable for an interactive
implementation.

@item
In the case of a multi--threaded system: terminate the current thread,
but do not terminate the other threads.  Possibly make the arguments to
error available to other threads in some way.  See the
@func{thread-join!}  mechanism in @ansrfi{18} on how this could be done.

@item
Package @var{reason} and @var{arg1}... up into an error object and pass
this error object to an exception handler.  The default exception
handler then might do something as described in points 1 to 3.

@item
In the case of a Scheme system that runs completely unattended and that
has no way to notify a human, the only reasonable course of action might
be to do nothing at all.  However, this should be considered a last
resort.  Clearly, if all implementors would choose this strategy, this
@srfi{} would not be very useful.
@end enumerate

An implementation might report more information than just @var{reason}
and @var{arg1}...  For instance, it might report the procedure name in
which the error occured or even print a stack trace.  However, this will
require additional support in the Scheme implementation.
@end defun


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Why error is a procedure


@noindent
It is conceivable to allow error to be a special form, such as a macro,
rather than a procedure.  This might make providing information such as
the source code location easier.  This possibility has been considered,
but rejected, for two reasons.

@enumerate
@item
Since error accepts a variable number of arguments, it could
occasionally be useful to use apply to call error.  However, this is not
possible if error was allowed to be a special form.

@item
Since error is currently a procedure in all Scheme implementations
mentioned above, it doesn't seem all that worthwhile to allow it to be a
special form.
@end enumerate

@c end of file
