@node fasl
@appendix Handling @fasl{} files


@fasl{} files are binary files in which compiled Scheme code and data is
stored; we can easily create a @fasl{} file as follows:

@example
vicare> (define filename "/tmp/marco/p.fasl")
vicare> (define p (open-file-output-port filename))
vicare> (fasl-write '(1 ciao "hello") p)
vicare> (close-port p)
vicare> (define p (open-file-input-port filename))
vicare> (fasl-read p)
(1 ciao "hello")
vicare> (close-port p)
vicare>
@end example

@menu
* fasl format::                 Binary format of a @fasl{} file.
* fasl api::                    @fasl{} files @api{}.
* fasl foreign::                Associating foreign libraries to
                                @fasl{} files.
@end menu

@c page
@node fasl format
@appendixsec Binary format of a @fasl{} file


A @fasl{} object is a header followed by one or more object fields
followed by an end--of--@fasl{} marker.  After the end--of--@fasl{}
marker the file must be at its @eof{}.

The header is the string @code{#@@IK0}, followed by @code{1} if fixnum
width is @math{30} bits, else followed by @code{2}; the end of fasl
marker is @code{@@}.

If the same object is referenced multiple times in the @fasl{} file: it
can be included only once and ``marked'' with a fixnum; such mark is
later dereferenced to insert a reference to the object in the loaded
code.

A data word is an exact signed integer of 32-bit or 64-bit depending on
the word size of the underlying platform.

An object field is a character in @ascii{} encoding, optionally followed
by data representing the serialisation of a Scheme value:

@table @asis
@item "N"
Denotes the empty list.

@item "T"
Denotes @true{}.

@item "F"
Denotes @false{}.

@item "E"
Denotes the end of file object.

@item "U"
Denotes the unspecified value (void).

@item "I" + word
A fixnum stored as a big endian word.

@item "s" + word(N) + octet ...
An @ascii{} string of @math{N} characters followed by @math{N} octets
representing the characters in @ascii{} encoding.  The data word
@math{N} must represent an exact integer in the range of fixnums.

@item "S" + word(N) + int32 ...
A Unicode string of @math{N} characters followed by @math{N} 32-bit
integers in native order representing the characters as Unicode code
points.  The data word @math{N} must represent an exact integer in the
range of fixnums.

@item "M" + symbol-name
A symbol.  @code{symbol-name} is a string field.

@item "G" + pretty-name + unique-name
A gensym.  Both @code{pretty-name} and @code{unique-name} are strings.

@item "c" + octet
A character in the @ascii{} range (@math{<= 255}).

@item "C" + int32
A character store as 32-bit integer representing a Unicode code point.

@item "P" + object1 + object2
A pair.

@item "V" + word(N) + object ...
A vector of length @math{N} followed by @math{N} object fields.  The
data word @math{N} must represent an exact integer in the range of
fixnums.

@item "v" + word(N) + octet ...
A bytevector of length @math{N} followed by @math{N} octets.  The data
word @math{N} must represent an exact integer in the range of fixnums.

@item "R" + rtd-name + rtd-symbol + field-count + name ...
A struct type descriptor.  @code{rtd-name} must be a symbol.
@code{rtd-symbol} must be a symbol.  @code{field-count} must be a word
in the fixnum range.  The @code{name} object fields must be symbols
representing the field name and there must be @code{field-count} of
them.

@item "@{" + field-count + rtd + field ...
A structure instance.  @code{field-count} must be a word in the fixnum
range.  @code{rtd} must be a struct type descriptor.  The @code{field}
object fields must be the fields of the structure instance and there
must be @code{field-count} of them.

@item "r" + denominator + numerator
Ratnum.

@item "f" + 8-byte
@ieee{} double precision flonum.  The bytes are stored: most significant
first, least significant last.

@item "b" + word(N) + octet ...
Denotes a bignum.  @var{N} is a signed integer word whose sign is the
sign of the bignum and whose modulo is the number of octets representing
the bignum.

@item "i" + real-part + imag-part
Complex numbers, both cflonum and compnum.

@item "l" + octet(N) + object ...
A list of @math{N <= 255} elements followed by the elements.

@item "L" + word(N) + object ...
A list of @math{N > 255} elements followed by the elements.

@item "h" + vector + vector
@func{eq?}  hashtable, first vector keys, second vector values.

@item "H" + vector + vector
@func{eqv?} hashtable, first vector keys, second vector values.

@item "W" + name + parent + uid + sealed? + opaque? + count + (bool + field) ...
An @rnrs{6} record type descriptor.

@table @code
@item name
Must be the return value of @func{record-type-name}.

@item parent
Must be the return value of @func{record-type-parent}.

@item uid
Must be the return value of @func{record-type-uid}.

@item sealed?
Must be the return value of @func{record-type-sealed?}.

@item opaque?
Must be the return value of @func{record-type-opaque?}.

@item count
Must be a fixnum representing the number of fields.
@end table

Each @code{bool + field} sequence must be a boolean representing the
mutability of the record field, followed by symbol representing the name
of the record field.

@item "x" + int + int + annotation + bytes + relocation vector
Denotes code.  A serialised code object is represented as follows, after
the @samp{x} header:

@enumerate
@item
An exact integer representing the number of bytes actually used in the
data area of the code object.  On 32-bit platforms: a big endian 32-bit
integer.  On 64-bit platforms: a sequence of two big endian 32-bit
integers.

@item
An exact integer representing the number of free variables in the code.
On 32-bit platforms: a big endian 32-bit integer.  On 64-bit platforms:
a sequence of two big endian 32-bit integers.

@item
A Scheme object representing the code annotation.

@item
An array of bytes being the binary code.

@item
The code relocation vector as an ordinary Scheme vector.
@end enumerate

@item "Q" + "x" + code object
Procedure.  A procedure is represented by the header @code{Q} followed
by the serialisation of a code object, header @code{x} included.

@item ">" + int32(I)
Mark the next object with index @math{I}.

@item "<" + int32(I)
Dereference the object marked with index @math{I}.

@item "O" + libid
Foreign library identifier.  @code{libid} must be a string representing
the foreign shared library identifier: on Unix--like systems it is
prefixed with @code{lib} and suffixed with @code{.so} to compose a
library file name.
@end table

@c page
@node fasl api
@appendixsec @fasl{} files @api{}


The following bindings are exported by the libraries @library{ikarus}
and @library{vicare}.


@defun fasl-write @var{obj} @var{port}
@defunx fasl-write @var{obj} @var{port} @var{libraries}
Serialise @var{obj} to the binary output port @var{port} prefixing it
with the @fasl{} file header.  If @var{libraries} is present: it must be
a list of strings representing foreign shared libraries to be loaded
whenever the @fasl{} file is loaded, @ref{fasl foreign} for details.
@end defun


@defun fasl-read @var{port}
Read and return a serialised object from the binary input @var{port}.
@end defun


@deffn Parameter fasl-directory
Holds a string representing the top directory under which @fasl{} files
are stored when libraries are compiled.  The default value is determined
as follows:

@enumerate
@item
Check the value of the system environment variable
@env{VICARE_FASL_DIRECTORY}: if set and its value exists as pathname,
the value is selected.  Else move to the next step.

@item
Acquire the value of the system environment variable @env{HOME}: if set
and its value exists as pathname, compose a directory pathname by
appending to the value the string:

@example
/.vicare/precompiled
@end example

Else move to the next step.

@item
Set the parameter to the empty string.  This means that a library with
pathname: @file{/@/usr/@/local/@/scheme/@/vicare/@/posix.sls}
will be compiled to
@file{/@/usr/@/local/@/scheme/@/vicare/@/posix.sls.vicare-32bit-fasl}
@end enumerate

New values for this parameter must be Scheme strings representing
existing pathnames.  The pathnames are normalised to their real
pathname, removing symbolic links and useless @code{..} components.

The default value of this parameter can be overridden by the command
line option @option{--fasl-directory}.
@end deffn


@defun fasl-path @var{filename}
Given a source file name return the associated full @fasl{} file name
using the current value of @func{fasl-directory}.  Return false if
@func{fasl-directory} is unset (which should never happen).  It is an
error if the file @var{filename} does not exist.
@end defun


@deffn Parameter fasl-search-path
@cindex @env{VICARE_FASL_PATH}, environment variable
@cindex Environment variable @env{VICARE_FASL_PATH}
Holds a list of strings representing directory pathnames.  This search
path is used to locate @fasl{} files when loading precompiled libraries.
The default value is determined as follows:

@enumerate
@item
Check the value of the system environment variable
@env{VICARE_FASL_PATH}: if set the value is selected.  Else move to the
next step.

@item
Acquire the value of the system environment variable @env{HOME}: if set
and its value exists as pathname, compose a directory pathname by
appending to the value the string:

@example
/.vicare/precompiled
@end example

@noindent
the result is put into a list and becomes the default value.
@end enumerate

Additional directories can be prepended to the search path with the
command line option @option{--fasl-path}.  If a @fasl{} target directory
is selected with the option @option{--fasl-directory}: the selected
directory is always prepended to the @fasl{} search path.
@end deffn

@c page
@node fasl foreign
@appendixsec Associating foreign libraries to @fasl{} files


@findex @func{foreign-call}


The macro @func{foreign-call}, exported by the libraries
@library{ikarus} and @library{vicare}, is expanded to compiled code
which invokes a C function from the process image; the first argument to
@func{foreign-call} is a string naming the C function.  Whenever the
code is compiled, the C pointer to the named function is retrieved with
a call to:

@example
dlsym(RTLD_DEFAULT, function_name);
@end example

@noindent
so all the public functions from the running @command{vicare} executable
are available and also all the functions from host's shared libraries
loaded with @cfunc{dlopen} using the flags @code{RTLD_NOW |
RTLD_GLOBAL}.

It is possible to associate one or more host's shared libraries to a
@fasl{} file, so that: whenever the @fasl{} file is loaded, the shared
library is loaded too and the functions required by @func{foreign-call}
are available.  This is especially useful to implement bindings to
foreign libraries without relying on the @ffi{} and making full use of
garbage collection facilities and access to Scheme values' memory
representations.

@quotation
@strong{NOTE} The mechanism described below is a temporary
implementation which may change in the future.
@end quotation

Whenever @value{PRJNAME}'s source code reader, in @code{#!vicare} mode,
while reading a program, script or library finds a form like:

@example
#!(load-shared-library "vicarecre2")
@end example

@noindent
it handles it as a special comment which causes no code to be expanded
nor compiled: a foreign shared library whose identifier is
@code{vicarecre2} is immediately loaded.

If the library file containing such special comment is compiled to a
@fasl{} file, an object field with header @code{O} is written to the
@strong{beginning} of the @fasl{} file: such object will cause the
foreign library to be loaded whenever the @fasl{} file is loaded.

On Unix--like systems: the library identifier is prefixed with
@code{lib} and suffixed with @code{.so} to compose a library file name.

@c end of file
