@node ffi
@chapter Foreign functions interface


@cindex Library @library{vicare ffi}
@cindex @library{vicare ffi}, library
@cindex Foreign functions interface, @ffi{}
@cindex @ffi{}, foreign functions interface


The library @library{vicare ffi} interfaces with the host operating
system and other external libraries exposing a C language interface; it
is suggested to import the @ffi{} library with the prefix @code{ffi.},
as in the following prelude:

@example
#!r6rs
(import (rnrs)
  (prefix (vicare ffi) ffi.))
@end example

The facilities of the @library{vicare ffi} give the Scheme program
unrestricted access to the computer memory, allowing one to allocate,
access, modify, and free memory as needed.  The facilities also allow
the Scheme program to @dfn{call out} to system procedures as well as
allow the native procedures to @dfn{call back} into Scheme.

Additionally, @library{vicare ffi} reexports all the bindings from the
library @library{ikarus system $foreign}.

@menu
* ffi libffi::                  Installing and using Libffi.
* ffi dl::                      Accessing shared libraries.
* ffi shared::                  System-agnostic shared libraries @api{}.
* ffi call::                    Callouts and callbacks.
* ffi foreign wrapper::         Wrapper for foreign pointers.
@end menu

@c page
@node ffi libffi
@section Installing and using Libffi


Currently @value{PRJNAME} implements the foreign--functions interface
(@ffi{}) using an extenal library: Libffi, originally by Anthony Green.
Libffi can be found at:

@center @url{http://sourceware.org/libffi/}

@noindent
and it is distributed under a liberal license (look for it at the site,
basically we can do everything but remove the original copyright
notice).

On Unix--like systems, we can install Libffi with the traditional
sequence:

@example
$ ./configure [options]
$ make
$ make install
@end example

@noindent
and the makefile supports the @env{DESTDIR} environment variable for
installation under a different directory prefix.

@quotation
@strong{NOTE} Libffi version 3.0.10 installs its header files under:

@example
$@{prefix@}/lib/libffi-3.0.10/include
@end example

@noindent
and trying to use the @option{--includedir} option to
@command{configure} will @strong{not} work in changing this.  It means
that when configuring @value{PRJNAME} for installation we have to specify where
the Libffi headers are to be found; @ref{overview install} for details.
@end quotation

@c page
@node ffi dl
@section Accessing foreign objects from Scheme


Most system implementations of dynamic loading employ reference counting
for @func{dlopen} and @func{dlclose} in that library resources are not
freed until the number of calls to @func{dlclose} matches the number of
calls to @func{dlopen}.  The following bindings are exported by
@library{vicare ffi}.


@defun dlopen
@defunx dlopen @var{library-name}
@defunx dlopen @var{library-name} @var{lazy?} @var{global?}
Interface to the C function @cfunc{dlopen}, see the manual page
@code{dlopen(3)}.  Load a platform shared library and return a pointer
object representing a handler for the library, which can be used as
argument for @func{dlsym} and @func{dlclose}.  If the library cannot be
loaded: return @false{} and the procedure @func{dlerror} can be used to
obtain the cause of the failure.

When no arguments are present: the returned pointer handler references
the current process and it can be used to retrieve pointers to functions
already loaded, for example the functions exported by the standard C
library.  The @var{lazy?} and @var{global?} arguments are meaningless in
this case.

When given: @var{library-name} must be a string or a bytevector
representing the name of the library; if it is a string: it is converted
to bytevector using the function referenced by
@func{filename->string-func}.

Library names are system--dependent and must include the appropriate
suffix (for exapmle @code{*.so} on Linux, @code{*.dylib} on Darwin and
@code{*.dll} on Cygwin).  @var{library-name} may include a full path
which identifies the location of the library, or it may just be the name
of the library in which case the system will lookup the library name
using the @env{LD_LIBRARY_PATH} environment variable.

The argument @var{lazy?} specifies how library dependencies are loaded.
If true, @func{dlopen} delays the resolution and loading of dependent
libraries until they are actually used.  If false, all library
dependencies are loaded before the call to @func{dlopen} returns.
@var{lazy?} defaults to @false{}.

The argument @var{global?} specifies the scope of the symbols exported
from the loaded library.  If true, all exported symbols become part of
the running image, and subsequent @func{dlsym} calls may not need to
specify the library from which the symbol is loaded.  If false, the
exported symbols are not global and the library pointer needs to be
specified for @func{dlsym}.  @var{global?} defaults to @false{}.
@end defun


@defun dlclose @var{handle}
Interface to the C function @cfunc{dlclose}, see the manual page
@code{dlclose(3)}.  Release the resources loaded from the library
referenced by the pointer handler @var{handle}.  If successful return
@true{}, else return @false{} and @func{dlerror} can be used to obtain
the cause of the error.

Closing a library renders all symbols and static data structures that
the library exports invalid and the program may crash or corrupt its
memory if such symbols are used after a library is closed.
@end defun


@defun dlsym @var{handle} @var{name}
Interface to the C function @cfunc{dlsym}, see the manual page
@code{dlsym(3)}.  Search the loaded library referenced by the pointer
@var{handle} for an exported symbol whose name is represented by the
string @var{name}.  If successful return a pointer object, else return
@false{} and @code{dlerror} can be used to obtain the cause of the
error.

If the returned value references a function: it can be used as argument
to the callout generators built by @func{make-c-callout-maker}.
@end defun


@defun dlerror
Interface to the C function @cfunc{dlerror}, see the manual page
@code{dlerror(3)}.  If any of the dynamic loading operations fails, the
cause of the error can be obtained by calling @func{dlerror} which
returns a string describing the error; return @false{} if there was no
dynamic loading error.
@end defun

@c page
@node ffi shared
@section System--agnostic shared libraries @api{}


This @api{} to load shared libraries is more system--agnostic with
respect to the functions described in @ref{ffi dl}.  The following
bindings are exported by @library{vicare ffi}.


@defun open-shared-object
@defunx open-shared-object @var{so-name}
Load a platform shared library and return a pointer object representing
a handler for the library.  If the library cannot be loaded: raise a
non--continuable exception with condition types @condition{who},
@condition{message}, @condition{shared-object-opening-error}.

When no arguments are present: the returned pointer handler references
the current process and it can be used to retrieve pointers to functions
already loaded, for example the functions exported by the standard C
library.

When given: @var{so-name} must be a string representing the name of the
library; library names are system--dependent and must include the
appropriate suffix (for exapmle @code{*.so} on Linux, @code{*.dylib} on
Darwin and @code{*.dll} on Cygwin).  @var{so-name} may include a full
path which identifies the location of the library, or it may just be the
name of the library.

@quotation
@strong{For Unix} We can find documentation about the search path of
shared objects in the manual page of @cfunc{dlopen}.  The system will
lookup the library name using the @env{LD_LIBRARY_PATH} environment
variable.
@end quotation
@end defun


@defun close-shared-object @var{so-handle}
Release the resources loaded from the library referenced by the
@var{so-handle}.  If the library cannot be closed: raise a
non--continuable exception with condition types @condition{who},
@condition{message}, @condition{shared-object-closing-error}.

Closing a library renders all symbols and static data structures that
the library exports invalid and the program may crash or corrupt its
memory if such symbols are used after a library is closed.
@end defun


@defun lookup-shared-object @var{so-handle} @var{name}
Search the loaded library referenced by the @var{so-handle} for an
exported symbol whose name is represented by the Scheme string
@var{name}.  If successful return a pointer object, else raise a
non--continuable exception with condition types @condition{who},
@condition{message}, @condition{shared-object-lookup-error}.

If the returned value references a function: it can be used as argument
to the callout generators built by @func{make-c-callout-maker}.
@end defun


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Shared object errors

@deftp {Condition Type} &shared-object-error
Base condition type for all the exceptions associated to a shared
object; it is derived from @condition{error}.  It has no fields.
@end deftp


@defun make-shared-object-error
Build and return a new instance of @condition{shared-object-error}.
@end defun


@defun shared-object-error? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is an instance of
@condition{shared-object-error}, else return @false{}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Opening shared objects

@deftp {Condition Type} &shared-object-opening-error
Condition type tagging exceptions associated to opening a shared object;
it is derived from @condition{shared-object-error}.  It has the
following fields:

@table @code
@item name
Scheme string representing the file name of the shared object.
@end table
@end deftp


@defun make-shared-object-opening-error @var{so-name}
Build and return a new instance of
@condition{shared-object-opening-error}.
@end defun


@defun shared-object-opening-error? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is an instance of
@condition{shared-object-opening-error}, else return @false{}.
@end defun


@defun condition-shared-object-opening-name @var{so-opening}
Accessor for the field of @condition{shared-object-opening-error}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Closing shared objects

@deftp {Condition Type} &shared-object-closing-error
Condition type tagging exceptions associated to closing a shared object;
it is derived from @condition{shared-object-error}.  It has the
following fields:

@table @code
@item so-handle
Pointer object referencing the shared object; it is the value returned
by @func{open-shared-object}.
@end table
@end deftp


@defun make-shared-object-closing-error @var{so-handle}
Build and return a new instance of
@condition{shared-object-closing-error}.
@end defun


@defun shared-object-closing-error? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is an instance of
@condition{shared-object-closing-error}, else return @false{}.
@end defun


@defun condition-shared-object-closing-so-handle @var{so-closing}
Accessor for the field of @condition{shared-object-closing-error}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Inspecting shared objects

@deftp {Condition Type} &shared-object-lookup-error
Condition type tagging exceptions associated to looking up a symbol in a
shared object; it is derived from @condition{shared-object-error}.  It
has the following fields:

@table @code
@item so-handle
Pointer object referencing the shared object; it is the value returned
by @func{open-shared-object}.

@item foreign-symbol
Scheme string representing the shared object exported symbol whose
address was requested.
@end table
@end deftp


@defun make-shared-object-lookup-error @var{so-handle} @var{symbol}
Build and return a new instance of
@condition{shared-object-lookup-error}.
@end defun


@defun shared-object-lookup-error? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is an instance of
@condition{shared-object-lookup-error}, else return @false{}.
@end defun


@defun condition-shared-object-lookup-so-handle @var{so-lookup}
@defunx condition-shared-object-lookup-foreign-symbol @var{so-lookup}
Accessors for the fields of @condition{shared-object-lookup-error}.
@end defun

@c page
@node ffi call
@section Callouts and callbacks


Callouts allow Scheme code to invoke C functions in a foreign library;
callbacks allow foreign C code to call a Scheme function.  The following
example shows how Scheme code can call a callout which in turns calls a
callback:

@example
#!r6rs
(import (rnrs)
  (prefix (vicare ffi) ffi.))

(define callout-maker
  (ffi.make-c-callout-maker  'unsigned-int '(unsigned-int)))

(define callback-maker
  (ffi.make-c-callback-maker 'unsigned-int '(unsigned-int)))

(define callback
  (callback-maker values))

(define callout
  (callout-maker callback))

(callout 123)   @result{} 123

(ffi.free-c-callback callback)
@end example

@menu
* ffi call intro::              Overview of @ffi{} function calls.
* ffi call out::                Calling out to foreign procedures.
* ffi call back::               Calling back to Scheme.
* ffi call types::              Specifying native types.
@end menu

@c page
@node ffi call intro
@subsection Overview of @ffi{} function calls


Both callouts and callbacks are built on top of function signatures
specifying the type of function arguments and returned value.  Libffi
allows us to specify such signatures through a Call InterFace (@cif{})
data structure; @value{PRJNAME} internally extends such a structure with
additional data to speed up marshaling of values from Scheme to native
representation and back.

At present, @cif{} data structures are allocated with @cfunc{malloc} and
never released.  Callouts and callbacks make use of @cif{} structures of
the same format, so such structures are internally cached; a single
@cif{} associated to a given function signature is used by all the
callouts and callbacks having the same signature.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Calling out to foreign functions

Callouts require only a @cif{} structure and the address of the foreign
C function; no additional structure needs to be allocated and then
released.

@value{PRJNAME} organises the callout @api{} by creating a callout maker
function, closed upon a @cif{} structure, which can build any number of
callout functions associating the @cif{} to foreign function pointers.
Maker functions are cached internally, so only one maker function for a
given signature is created in a running process.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Calling back to Scheme functions

Callbacks require an additional data structure, because they must
generate at runtime callable machine code referenced by a pointer; such
additional data structure cannot be automatically released by the
garbage collector, but it can be explicitly freed by the program when
the callback is no longer needed.

We can think of the code handling a callback as organised like the
following pseudo--code:

@example
cif_t  call_interface;

int
specific_callback (int a, long b, double c)
@{
  void *  args[3] = @{ &a, &b, &c @};
  int     result;
  generic_callback(&call_interface, &result, args);
  return result;
@}

void
generic_callback (cif_t * call_interface,
                  void * result, void * args)
@{
  scheme_value  s_a, s_b, s_c;
  scheme_value  s_result;
  s_a = native_to_scheme(call_interface, 0, args);
  s_b = native_to_scheme(call_interface, 1, args);
  s_c = native_to_scheme(call_interface, 2, args);
  s_result = scheme_callback(s_a, s_b, s_c);
  scheme_to_native(call_interface, result, s_result);
@}

scheme_value
scheme_callback (scheme_value s_a,
                 scheme_value s_b,
                 scheme_value s_c)
@{
  /* process arguments, return result */
@}
@end example

@noindent
where: @code{specific_callback} is generated at runtime by Libffi;
@code{generic_callback}, @code{scheme_to_native} and
@code{native_to_scheme} are implemented by @value{PRJNAME}'s runtime
(using generic operations); @code{scheme callback} is implemented by the
Scheme program.  A pointer to @code{specific_callback} is the one we
need to acquire when creating a callback from Scheme.

@value{PRJNAME} organises the callback @api{} by creating a callback
maker function, closed upon a @cif{} structure, which can build any
number of callback functions associating the @cif{} to Scheme functions.
Maker functions are cached internally, so only one maker function for
each given signature is created in a running process.

@c page
@node ffi call out
@subsection Calling out to foreign procedures


In order to call out to a foreign procedure, we must provide two pieces
of information: the signature of the foreign procedure and the address
of the procedure in memory.  The signature must usually be hard--coded
into the program; the address is obtained using @func{dlsym}.

Using the signature, the @ffi{} determines how Scheme values are
converted to and from native values; a signature is composed of two
parts: a Scheme symbol specifying the return type, a list of Scheme
symbols specifying the argument types.

Here is a simple example, without error checking, showing how to
interface to the C function @cfunc{sinh}:

@example
#!r6rs
(import (vicare)
  (prefix (vicare ffi) ffi.))

(define libc
  (ffi.dlopen))

(define sinh-address
  (ffi.dlsym libc "sinh"))

(define callout-maker
  (ffi.make-c-callout-maker 'double '(double)))

(define sinh
  (callout-maker sinh-address))

(sinh 1.2)      @result{} 1.5094613554121725
@end example

@noindent
using the @ffi{} we build a callout function generator which can be used
to create any number of callout functions having the same signature.
Generated callout functions are garbage collected like any other Scheme
value.


@defun make-c-callout-maker @var{ret-type} @var{arg-types}
Build and return a function to be used to generate callout Scheme
functions wrapping foreign functions which follow the C language
conventions for calling, arguments and return values.

The returned generator function accepts as single argument a pointer
object representing the address of a foreign function; the value
returned by the generator function is a Scheme closure wrapping the
foreign function.  The wrapper Scheme closure takes care of marshaling
Scheme values as appropriate for the underlying platform.

@var{ret-type} must be a Scheme symbol specifying the type of the
returned value; if the foreign function returns no value: @var{ret-type}
must be the symbol @code{void}.

@var{arg-types} must be a list of Scheme symbols specifying the type of
the arguments; if the foreign function accepts no arguments:
@var{arg-types} must be nil or the list @code{(void)}.

@ref{ffi call types} for the specification of accepted type symbols.
@end defun


@defun make-c-callout-maker/with-errno @var{ret-type} @var{arg-types}
Like @func{make-c-callout-maker}, but the generated callout closures
will return two values: the return value from the foreign function call
and the value of the C language variable @code{errno} right after the
foreign function call.
@end defun

@c page
@node ffi call back
@subsection Calling back to Scheme


In order to arrange for a foreign library to callback to a Scheme
function we need a suitable Scheme function and the signature of the
procedure the foreign library expects.  The signature must usually be
hard--coded in the program.

Using the signature, the @ffi{} determines how native values are
converted to and from Scheme values; a signature is composed of two
parts: a Scheme symbol specifying the return type, a list of Scheme
symbols specifying the argument types.  The signature format is the same
as the one used for callouts; @ref{ffi call out} for details.

Note that a callback function is indistinguishable from other native
procedures whose address is obtained using @func{dlsym} or similar
means.  In particular, such native pointers can be passed to callout
generators resulting in a Scheme procedure that calls out to the native
procedure that in turn calls back into Scheme.

The following example shows how to create an identity function for
native integers composed by a Scheme function calling out to a foreign
function, calling back to the Scheme function @func{values}:

@example
#!r6rs
(import (vicare)
  (prefix (vicare ffi) ffi.))

(define callout-maker
  (ffi.make-c-callout-maker  'unsigned-int '(unsigned-int)))

(define callback-maker
  (ffi.make-c-callback-maker 'unsigned-int '(unsigned-int)))

(define identity
  (callout-maker (callback-maker values)))

(identity 123)  @result{} 123
@end example

@noindent
using the @ffi{} we build a callback function generator which can be
used to create any number of callback functions having the same
signature.  Generated callback functions are @strong{not} garbage
collected like the other Scheme values.


@defun make-c-callback-maker @var{ret-type} @var{arg-types}
Build and return a function to be used to generate callback functions
following the C language conventions for calling, arguments and return
values and wrapping Scheme functions.

The returned generator function accepts as single argument the Scheme
function to be wrapped; the value returned by the generator function is
a pointer object referencing a native function.  The wrapper native
function takes care of marshaling Scheme values as appropriate for the
underlying platform.

@var{ret-type} must be a Scheme symbol specifying the type of the
returned value; if the callback function must return no value:
@var{ret-type} must be the symbol @code{void}.

@var{arg-types} must be a list of Scheme symbols specifying the type of
the arguments; if the callback function must accept no arguments:
@var{arg-types} must be nil or the list @code{(void)}.

@ref{ffi call types} for the specification of accepted type symbols.
@end defun


@defun free-c-callback @var{c-callback-pointer}
Release the resources associated to the given C pointer referencing a
callback function.  If the pointer is not a callback pointer: raise an
assertion violation.
@end defun

@c page
@node ffi call types
@subsection Specifying native types


The following is a list of Scheme symbols used to specify native types
for both callouts and callbacks.  If a type is not available on a
platform: the callout and callback generators will raise an error if the
associated type specifier is used.

@table @code
@item signed-char
@itemx unsigned-char
Exact integers in the range for @code{char} and @code{unsigned char}.

@item signed-short
@itemx unsigned-short
Exact integers in the range for @code{short int} and @code{unsigned short
int}.

@item signed-int
@itemx unsigned-int
Exact integers in the range for @code{int} and @code{unsigned int}.

@item signed-long
@itemx unsigned-long
Exact integers in the range for @code{long} and @code{unsigned long}.

@item signed-long-long
@itemx unsigned-long-long
Exact integers in the range for @code{long long} and @code{unsigned long
long}.

@item float
@itemx double
Flonum.

@item pointer
@itemx callback
Pointer object.  The symbol @code{callback} can be used to specify a
pointer to a callback, but it is a full synonym of @code{pointer}.

@item int8_t
@itemx uint8_t
Exact integers in the range for @code{int8_t} and @code{uint8_t}.

@item int16_t
@itemx uint16_t
Exact integers in the range for @code{int16_t} and @code{uint16_t}.

@item int32_t
@itemx uint32_t
Exact integers in the range for @code{int32_t} and @code{uint32_t}.

@item int64_t
@itemx uint64_t
Exact integers in the range for @code{int64_t} and @code{uint64_t}.

@item size_t
@itemx ssize_t
Exact integers in the range for @code{size_t} and @code{ssize_t}.

@item off_t
Exact integers in the range for @code{off_t}.

@item ptrdiff_t
Exact integers in the range for @code{ptrdiff_t}.
@end table

@c page
@node ffi foreign wrapper
@section Wrapper for foreign pointers


@cindex Library @library{vicare ffi foreign-pointer-wrapper}
@cindex @library{vicare ffi foreign-pointer-wrapper}, library


The library @library{vicare ffi foreign-pointer-wrapper} proposes a
Scheme data struct definition, and related facilities, to be used to
wrap Scheme pointer objects referencing data structures defined by
foreign libraries.

@menu
* ffi foreign wrapper syntax::  Defining wrapper structures.
* ffi foreign wrapper binds::   Defined bindings.
@end menu

@c page
@node ffi foreign wrapper syntax
@subsection Defining wrapper structures


The following bindings are exported by the library @library{vicare ffi
foreign-pointer-wrapper}.


@deffn Syntax define-foreign-pointer-wrapper @meta{type-id} @meta{fields-clause} @meta{destructor-clause} @meta{collector-clause} @meta{collected-clause} @dots{}
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} fields
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} foreign-destructor
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} collector-struct-type
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} collected-struct-type
Wrapper for @func{define-struct} from @library{vicare} defining a struct
type with some opaque fields.  @meta{type-id} must be an identifier
representing the name of the struct type.

Two categories of struct instances exist: those who @strong{own} the
foreign data structure referenced by the pointer object; those who
@strong{do not} own the foreign data structure referenced by the pointer
object.  There are situations where the latter data structures are
unsafe to use; @value{PRJNAME} discharges on the application the
responsibility of using or not using such structures.

@table @asis
@item @meta{fields-clause}
This clause is @strong{optional}.  It must have one of the forms:

@example
(fields)
(fields @var{field-id} ...)
@end example

@noindent
where @code{fields} is the auxiliary keyword exported by
@rsixlibrary{rnrs} and the @var{field-id} are field name identifiers.
The listed fields become normal fields of the defined structure.

@item @meta{destructor-clause}
It must have one of the forms:

@example
(foreign-destructor #f)
(foreign-destructor @meta{destructor-id})
@end example

@noindent
where @meta{destructor-id} must be an identifier bound to the foreign
data structure destructor Scheme function; when the value in the clause
is @false{}: the data struct has no destructor function.

Whenever a struct instance owning the pointer object is finalised: the
referenced destructor function is applied to the Scheme data struct; its
responsibility is to extract the pointer object and apply to it whatever
finalisation procedure the foreign library provides.

@item @meta{collector-clause}
It must have one of the forms:

@example
(collector-struct-type #f)
(collector-struct-type @meta{collector-id})
@end example

@noindent
where @meta{collector-id} must be an identifier representing the name of
another data struct type defined with this syntax; when the value of the
clause is @false{}: @meta{type-id} has no collector struct type.

Instances of @meta{type-id} are meant to be, in some way, subordinate to
@meta{collector-id}; when building a new instance of type
@meta{type-id}, it is possible, but not mandatory, to specify an
instance of type @meta{collector-id} that ``collects'' it:

@itemize
@item
Whenever the instance of type @meta{collector-id} is finalised: the
collected instances of type @meta{type-id} are finalised too.

@item
Whenever the instance of type @meta{type-id} is finalised: it
unregisters itself from the collection in the instance of type
@meta{collector-id}.
@end itemize

@item @meta{collected-clause}
These clauses are optional and can be present in any number; when used,
they must have the form:

@example
(collected-struct-type @meta{collected-id})
@end example

@noindent
where @meta{collected-id} must be an identifier representing the name of
another data struct type defined with this syntax.

Instances of @meta{collected-id} are meant to be, in some way,
subordinate to @meta{type-id}; when building a new insance of type
@meta{collected-id}, it is possible, but not mandatory, to specify an
instance of @meta{type-id} that ``collects'' it:

@itemize
@item
Whenever the instance of type @meta{type-id} is finalised: the collected
instances of type @meta{collected-id} are finalised too.

@item
Whenever the instance of type @meta{collected-id} is finalised: it
unregisters itself from the collection in the instance of type
@meta{type-id}.
@end itemize
@end table
@end deffn

@c page
@node ffi foreign wrapper binds
@subsection Defined bindings


The syntax @func{define-foreign-pointer-wrapper} defines a number of
bindings associated to the struct type; all the defined bindings are
prefixed by the identifier @meta{type-id} or by @code{$} followed by the
identifier @meta{type-id}.

Here only the bindings in the public @api{} are documented:

@table @code
@item (make-@meta{type-id}/owner @var{pointer} @var{field} ...)
@itemx (make-@meta{type-id}/owner @var{pointer} @var{collector} @var{field} ...)
Build and return a new struct instance of type @meta{type-id} wrapping
the pointer object @var{pointer}; the returned instance @strong{owns}
the @var{pointer} object.

If the definition of @meta{type-id} includes a clause
@code{collector-struct-type} with value @false{}: this maker function
accepts a single argument.

If the definition of @meta{type-id} includes a clause
@code{collector-struct-type} with an identifier @meta{collector-id} as
value: this maker function accepts two arguments, the second being the
instance of type @meta{collector-id} or @false{} if there is no
collector instance.

If the definition of @meta{type-id} includes a clause @code{fields}: the
constructor function accepts as many arguments as specified custom
fields.

@item (make-@meta{type-id}/not-owner @var{pointer})
@itemx (make-@meta{type-id}/not-owner @var{pointer} @var{collector})
Build and return a new struct instance of type @meta{type-id} wrapping
the pointer object @var{pointer}; the returned instance @strong{does not
own} the @var{pointer} object.

If the definition of @meta{type-id} includes a clause
@code{collector-struct-type} with value @false{}: this maker function
accepts a single argument.

If the definition of @meta{type-id} includes a clause
@code{collector-struct-type} with an identifier @meta{collector-id} as
value: this maker function accepts two arguments, the second being the
instance of type @meta{collector-id} or @false{} if there is no
collector instance.

@item ($@meta{type-id}-finalise @var{struct})
Perform the finalisation procedure for this @var{struct} instance; it is
safe to apply this finalisation function multiple times to the same
@var{struct} instance: the first time the finalisation takes place,
subsequent times nothing happens.  The argument to this function
@strong{must} be an instance of @meta{type-id}, else the behaviour is
undefined.

The finalisation procedure involves the following:

@enumerate
@item
If a custom destructor function has been registered: it is applied to
@var{struct} before any finalisation takes place.

@item
If @var{struct} has a collecting struct @var{collector}: @var{struct} is
unregistered from @var{collector}.

@item
If @var{struct} collects instances of another type: all the collected
instances are finalised by invoking their unsafe finalisation functions;
any exception raised by these finalisation functions is catched by
@func{guard} and discarded.

@item
If a foreign destructor function @meta{destructor-id} was specified in
the definition of @meta{type-id} and this struct instance owns the
pointer object: the foreign destructor is applied to @var{struct}; any
exception raised by the destructor function is catched by @func{guard}
and discarded.  The return value of the foreign destructor becomes the
return value of this function.

@item
The internal field holding the @var{pointer} object is reset to
@false{}, to mark this struct instance as already finalised.
@end enumerate

About the returned value:

@itemize
@item
If this is the first time the finalisation function is applied, there is
a foreign destructor and its application is successful: the returned
value is the return value from the foreign destructor.

@item
If this is the first time the finalisation function is applied, there is
a foreign destructor and its application raises an exception: the
returned value is @false{}.

@item
If this is @strong{not} the first time the finalisation function is
applied: the returned value is @false{}.
@end itemize

@item (@meta{type-id}? @var{obj})
Type predicate function; it returns @true{} if @var{obj} is an instance
of type @meta{type-id}, otherwise it returns @false{}.

@item (@meta{type-id}?/alive @var{obj})
Type and liveness predicate function; it returns @true{} if @var{obj} is
an instance of type @meta{type-id} and its @var{pointer} object has not
yet been finalised, otherwise it returns @false{}.

@quotation
@strong{NOTE} The returned information really represents the status of
the foreign data structure only for struct instances that @strong{do
own} the foreign pointer.
@end quotation

@item ($@meta{type-id}-alive? @var{struct})
Unsafe liveness predicate function; it returns @true{} if @var{struct}
has a @var{pointer} object not yet finalised, otherwise it returns
@false{}.  The argument to this function @strong{must} be an instance of
@meta{type-id}, else the behaviour is undefined.

@quotation
@strong{NOTE} The returned information really represents the status of
the foreign data structure only for struct instances that @strong{do
own} the foreign pointer.
@end quotation

@item (@meta{type-id} @var{obj})
Validation form to be used with the facilities of the library
@library{vicare arguments validation}.  Succeed if @var{obj} satisfies
the predicate @code{@meta{type-id}?}.

@item (@meta{type-id}/alive @var{obj})
Validation form to be used with the facilities of the library
@library{vicare arguments validation}.  Succeed if @var{obj} satisfies
the predicate @code{@meta{type-id}?/alive}.

@item (false-or-@meta{type-id} @var{obj})
Validation form to be used with the facilities of the library
@library{vicare arguments validation}.  Succeed if @var{obj} is @false{}
or satisfies the predicate @code{@meta{type-id}?}.

@item (false-or-@meta{type-id}/alive @var{obj})
Validation form to be used with the facilities of the library
@library{vicare arguments validation}.  Succeed if @var{obj} is @false{}
or satisfies the predicate @code{@meta{type-id}?/alive}.

@item (@meta{type-id}-custom-destructor @var{struct})
@itemx (set-@meta{type-id}-custom-destructor! @var{struct} @var{destructor})
Retrieve or set a custom destructor function associated to @var{struct}.
Whenever the @var{struct} is finalised: @var{destructor} is applied to
@var{struct} before the internal state of @var{struct} is finalised.

@item (@meta{type-id}-pointer @var{struct})
Return the pointer object referencing the foreign data structure; if
@var{struct} has already been finalised: the returned value is @false{}.

@item (@meta{type-id}-pointer-owner? @var{struct})
Return @true{} if @var{struct} owns the pointer object, otherwise return
@false{}.

@item (@meta{type-id}-putprop @var{struct} @var{key} @var{value})
Add a new property @var{key} with @var{value} to the property list of
@var{struct}.  If @var{key} is already set: the old entry is mutated to
reference @var{value}.  @var{key} must be a symbol.

@item (@meta{type-id}-getprop @var{struct} @var{key})
Return the value of the property @var{key} in the property list of
@var{struct}; if @var{key} is not set return @false{}.  @var{key} must
be a symbol.

@item (@meta{type-id}-remprop @var{struct} @var{key})
Remove the property @var{key} from the property list of @var{struct}.
@var{key} must be a symbol.

@item (@meta{type-id}-property-list @var{struct})
Return a new association list representing the property list of
@var{struct}.
@end table

If the definition of @meta{type-id} includes a clause
@code{collector-struct-type} with an identifier @meta{collector-id} as
value, the following bindings are available:

@table @code
@item (@meta{type-id}-collector-@meta{collector-id} @var{struct})
Return the instance of type @meta{collector-id} that was registered as
collector for @var{struct}; if no collector was registered: return
@false{}.
@end table

If the definition of @meta{type-id} includes a clause
@code{collected-struct-type} with an identifier @meta{collected-id} as
value, the following bindings are available:

@table @code
@item ($@meta{type-id}-register-@meta{collected-id}! @var{collector} @var{struct})
Register @var{struct} in the internal table of @var{collector}.  No
arguments validation is peformed: @var{collector} must be of type
@meta{type-id}; @var{struct} must be of type @meta{collected-id}.

@item ($@meta{type-id}-forget-@meta{collected-id}! @var{collector} @var{collected})
Remove @var{collected} from the internal table of @var{collector}.  No
arguments validation is peformed: @var{collector} must be of type
@meta{type-id}; @var{collected} must be of type @meta{collected-id}.

@item ($@meta{type-id}-contains-@meta{collected-id}? @var{collector} @var{struct})
Query the internal table of @var{collected} and return true if
@var{struct} is present, otherwise return false.  No arguments
validation is peformed: @var{collector} must be of type @meta{type-id}.

@item ($@meta{type-id}-vector-of-collected-@meta{collected-id} @var{struct})
Return a Scheme vector containing the instances of type
@meta{collected-id} collected by @var{struct}.
@end table

@c end of file
