@node getopts
@chapter Parsing command line arguments


@cindex @library{vicare getopts}, library
@cindex Library @library{vicare getopts}


The library @library{vicare getopts} implements basic parsing of
Unix--style command line arguments.  It is meant to be used as
low--level module in an infrastructure for command line interfaces
(@acronym{CLI}).  It is alternative to @ansrfi{37}, @ref{srfi args-fold,
@ansrfi{37} a program argument processor}.

It is suggested to import this library with the prefix @samp{getopts.},
as in:

@example
(import (vicare)
  (prefix (vicare getopts) getopts.))
@end example

@menu
* getopts intro::               Introduction.
* getopts types::               Type definitions.
* getopts config::              Parser configuration.
* getopts parser::              Parsing arguments.
* getopts conditions::          Exceptions and condition objects.
@end menu

@c page
@node getopts intro
@section Introduction


Command line arguments are available through the @func{command-line}
function from the @rsixlibrary{programs} library.  For the purposes of
this documentation, command line arguments are divided into three
categories:

@table @asis
@item Option without value
A string selecting a configuration option that can be turned on or off.
It can be a single character (brief option) or a full--word (long
option).

@item Option with value
A string selecting a value for a configuration option; an option's value
is a string of any length, including the empty string.

@item Non--option
A value to be passed to the program.
@end table

Let's assume that:

@itemize
@item
@option{-v}, @option{-i} and @option{-h} are brief options that do not
require a value.

@item
@option{-f}, @option{-o} and @option{-I} are brief options that do
require a value.

@item
@option{--verbose}, @option{--interactive} and @option{--help} are long
options that do not require a value.

@item
@option{--file}, @option{--output} and @option{--include} are long
options that do require a value.
@end itemize

@noindent
the following command line chunks are so interpreted:

@table @code
@item -vh -o green -i -Iwhite -f red
The @option{-v}, @option{-h} and @option{-i} options without value; the
@option{-o} option with value @samp{green}; the @option{-I} option with
value @samp{white}; the @option{-f} option with value @samp{red}.

@item --verbose --help --output=green --interactive
@itemx --include white --file=red
The @option{--verbose}, @option{--help} and @option{--interactive}
options without value; the @option{--output} option with value
@samp{green}; the @option{--include} option with value @samp{white}; the
@option{--file} option with value @samp{red}.
@end table

The argument @code{--} is recognised as ``end of options'' marker: All
the arguments following it are interpreted as non--options, even if
their string starts with a dash or double dash.

Chains of brief options are allowed: The options @option{-v},
@option{-i} and @option{-h} can be selected with the single argument
@code{-vih}.  Notice, though, that only options with no value can be
chained; an option with value can appear only as last in the train, with
no value attached.  For example:

@example
-vihI white
@end example

@noindent
is interpreted as the options @option{-v}, @option{-i} and @option{-h}
with no value followed by the option @option{-I} with value
@samp{white}; the following:

@example
-vihIwhite              ;forbidden
@end example

@noindent
could be made possible but, being unreadable, it is forbidden.

Notice that a single dash, @samp{-}, is a valid non--option argument.

@c page
@node getopts types
@section Type definitions


@deftp Class @aclass{option}
Type of records representing command line options.
@end deftp


@defcv {Immutable Field} @aclass{option} brief
A Scheme character representing a dash plus single character (brief)
option selector; to specify an option with no brief selector, we can set
this field to @false{}.
@end defcv


@defcv {Immutable Field} @aclass{option} long
A Scheme string representing a long option selector, without the
double--dash prefix; to specify an option with no long selector, we can
set this field to @false{}.
@end defcv


@defcv {Immutable Field} @aclass{option} requires-argument?
Boolean, true if this option requires an argument.
@end defcv


@defcv {Immutable Field} @aclass{option} description
Scheme string describing this option, to be used in help screens.
@end defcv


@defcv {Immutable Field} @aclass{option} action
Semantic action, a closure to be invoked when this option is found on
the command line.

@itemize
@item
If the field @code{requires-argument?} is set to @false{}: the closure
is applied to a single value being the @class{option} record
representing the option.

@item
If the field @code{requires-argument?} is set to @true{}: the closure is
applied to two values being the @class{option} record representing the
option and the Scheme string representing the option's value.
@end itemize

We have to remember that @class{option} records can be compared with
@func{eq?}.
@end defcv


@defop Syntax @aclass{option} make* @aclass{option} @var{brief} @var{long} @var{requires-argument?} @var{description} @var{action}
Build and return a new @class{option} record.
@end defop


@defop Syntax @aclass{option} is-a? @var{obj} @aclass{option}
Return true if @var{obj} is a record of type @class{option}.
@end defop


@defun <option>? @var{obj}
Return true if @var{obj} is a record of type @class{option}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax define-option @meta{name} @meta{clause} ...
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} brief: @meta{char}
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} long: @meta{string}
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} requires-argument: @meta{bool}
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} description: @meta{string}
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} action: @meta{function}
Build a new @class{option} record and bind it to @meta{name}, which
must be a Scheme symbol.  All the @meta{clause} arguments must be
subforms with an auxiliary syntactic keyword as first element.  Example:

@example
(define-option interactive
  (brief:               #\i)
  (long:                "interactive")
  (requires-argument:   #f)
  (description:         "ask the user first")
  (action:              (lambda (option) ---)))
@end example
@end deffn

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Traditional records @api{}


@defun make-<option> @var{brief} @var{long} @var{requires-argument?} @var{description} @var{action}
Build and return a new @class{option} record.
@end defun


@defun <option>? @var{obj}
Return true if @var{obj} is a record of type @class{option}.
@end defun


@defun <option>-brief @var{record}
@defunx <option>-long @var{record}
@defunx <option>-requires-argument? @var{record}
@defunx <option>-description @var{record}
@defunx <option>-action @var{record}
Accessors for the fields of an @class{option} record.
@end defun

@c page
@node getopts config
@section Parser configuration


@deftp Enumeration getopts-configuration
Enumeration to be used to configure the @func{getopts} parser.  It
contains the following symbols:

@table @code
@item delayed
If given, action closures invocations are returned in a list rather that
immediately evaluated; this allows @func{getopts} to parse the whole
command line without changing the state of the program.

The returned list has a thunk for each semantic action, in the same
order in which the corresponding arguments appear on the command line.
We can evaluate the thunks with:

@example
(let ((thunks (getopts ---)))
  (for-each (lambda (T) (T)) thunks))
@end example

@item ignore-multiple-double-dashes
The first double--dash argument, @samp{--}, always marks the end of
options.  If this option is given, multiple @samp{--} after the first
are all ignored; else they are interpreted as non--option arguments.
@end table
@end deftp


@deffn Syntax getopts-options @var{symbol} ...
Expand into an enumerated set of symbols to be used to configure the
operations of the @func{getopts} parser.
@end deffn

@c page
@node getopts parser
@section Parsing arguments


@defun getopts @var{command-line} @var{options} @var{argument-action}
@defunx getopts @var{command-line} @var{options} @var{argument-action} @var{config-options}
Parse the Scheme strings in the list @var{command-line} as command line
arguments, according to the options described by the list @var{options}
of @class{option} records.  If the configuration option @code{delayed} is
not used, the return value is @false{}.

@var{argument-action} must be a Scheme function accepting a single
argument: a Scheme string representing a command line non--option.

The optional @var{config-options} must be an enumerated set of values
from the @code{getopts-configuration} enumeration.
@end defun


Meaningless usage example:

@example
(import (rnrs)
  (vicare getopts))

(define result #f)

(let-syntax
    ((set-cons! (syntax-rules ()
                  ((_ ?name ?form)
                   (set! ?name (cons ?form ?name))))))

  (define (register-with opt val)
    (set-cons! result (list (<option>-long opt) val)))

  (define (register-without opt)
    (set-cons! result (list (<option>-long opt))))

  (define (register-non-option arg)
    (set-cons! result arg)))

(define-option interactive
  (brief:               #\i)
  (long:                "interactive")
  (requires-argument:   #f)
  (description:         "ask the user first")
  (action:              register-without))

(define-option force
  (brief:               #\f)
  (long:                "force")
  (requires-argument:   #f)
  (description:         "hurt me plenty")
  (action:              register-without))

(define-option help
  (brief:               #\h)
  (long:                "help")
  (requires-argument?:  #f)
  (description:         "print help screen")
  (action:              register-without))

(define-option file
  (brief:               #\F)
  (long:                "file")
  (requires-argument:   #t)
  (description:         "input file")
  (action:              register-with))

(define-option archive
  (brief:               #\A)
  (long:                "archive")
  (requires-argument:   #t)
  (description:         "output archive")
  (action:              register-with))

(getopts (command-line)
         (list interactive force help file archive)
         register-non-option
         (getopts-options ignore-multiple-double-dashes))
@end example

@c page
@node getopts conditions
@section Exceptions and condition objects


When @func{getopts} detects an error in the input command line
arguments, it raises a continuable exception; returning from the
exception is possible and makes @func{getopts} go on parsing with the
next argument.  It is not always advisable to continue parsing after an
error has been signaled.

The raised exception values are compound condition of the types
described below.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Base condition object


@deftp {Condition Type} &getopts
Base type for all the condition objects thrown by @func{getopts}; it is
derived from @condition{error}.  It has no fields.
@end deftp


@defun make-getopts-condition
@defunx getopts-condition? @var{obj}
Constructor and predicate for the @condition{getopts} condition object.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Option data object


@deftp {Condition Type} &option
Data condition type used to hold records of type @class{option}
describing an option involved in an error; it is derived from
@condition{condition}.
@end deftp


@defun make-option-condition @var{option-record}
@defunx option-condition? @var{obj}
Constructor and predicate for the @condition{option} condition object.
@end defun


@defun condition-option @var{option-condition}
Accessor for the @code{option} field of a @condition{option} condition
object.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Argument data object


@deftp {Condition Type} &argument
Data condition type used to hold Scheme strings representing command
line arguments involved in an error; it is derived from
@condition{condition}.
@end deftp


@defun make-argument-condition @var{argument-string}
@defunx argument-condition? @var{obj}
Constructor and predicate for the @condition{argument} condition object.
@end defun


@defun condition-argument @var{argument-condition}
Accessor for the @code{argument} field of a @condition{argument} condition
object.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Option selector data object


@deftp {Condition Type} &brief/long
Data condition type used to hold Scheme strings or characters
representing option selectors involved in an error; it is derived from
@condition{condition}.
@end deftp


@defun make-brief/long-condition @var{brief/long-string}
@defunx brief/long-condition? @var{obj}
Constructor and predicate for the @condition{brief/long} condition object.
@end defun


@defun condition-brief/long @var{brief/long-condition}
Accessor for the field of a @condition{brief/long} condition object.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Unknown option error


@deftp {Condition Type} &unknown-option
Condition type used to signal an ``unknown option'' error; it is derived
from @condition{getopts}.  It has no fields.
@end deftp


@defun make-unknown-option-condition
@defunx unknown-option-condition? @var{obj}
Constructor and predicate for @condition{unknown-option} condition objects.
@end defun


@defun raise-unknown-option @var{who} @var{brief/long} @var{argument} @var{message}
Raise a continuable exception describing an ``unknown option'' error;
the raised object is a compound condition with components of the
following types: @condition{who}, @condition{brief/long}, @condition{argument},
@condition{message}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Option requires value error


@deftp {Condition Type} &option-requires-value
Condition type used to signal an ``option requires value'' error; it is
derived from @condition{getopts}.  It has no fields.
@end deftp


@defun make-option-requires-value-condition
@defunx option-requires-value-condition? @var{obj}
Constructor and predicate for @condition{option-requires-value} condition
objects.
@end defun


@defun raise-option-requires-value @var{who} @var{option} @var{argument} @var{message}
Raise a continuable exception describing an ``option requires value''
error; the raised object is a compound condition with components of the
following types: @condition{who}, @condition{option}, @condition{argument},
@condition{message}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Option requires no value error


@deftp {Condition Type} &option-requires-no-value
Condition type used to signal an ``option requires no value'' error; it
is derived from @condition{getopts}.  It has no fields.
@end deftp


@defun make-option-requires-no-value-condition
@defunx option-requires-no-value-condition? @var{obj}
Constructor and predicate for @condition{option-requires-no-value} condition
objects.
@end defun


@defun raise-option-requires-no-value @var{who} @var{option} @var{argument} @var{message}
Raise a continuable exception describing an ``option requires no value''
error; the raised object is a compound condition with components of the
following types: @condition{who}, @condition{option}, @condition{argument},
@condition{message}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Invalid option error


@deftp {Condition Type} &invalid-option
Condition type used to signal an ``invalid option'' error; it is derived
from @condition{getopts}.  It has no fields.
@end deftp


@defun make-invalid-option-condition
@defunx invalid-option-condition? @var{obj}
Constructor and predicate for @condition{invalid-option} condition objects.
@end defun


@defun raise-invalid-option @var{who} @var{option} @var{argument} @var{message}
Raise a continuable exception describing an ``invalid option'' error;
the raised object is a compound condition with components of the
following types: @condition{who}, @condition{option},
@condition{argument}, @condition{message}.
@end defun

@c end of file
