@node char-sets
@chapter Character sets


@cindex @library{vicare containers char-sets}, library
@cindex Library @library{vicare containers char-sets}


The library @library{vicare containers char-sets} handles sets of
characters.

A @dfn{character} is every value for which the application of
@func{char?}  returns @true{}; @dfn{character sets} are values of
disjoint type @code{char-set} representing a number of character in the
available Unicode ranges, @vicareref{stdlib unicode, Unicode}.

@menu
* char-sets conv::              Arguments naming conventions.
* char-sets make::              Constructors.
* char-sets pred::              Predicates.
* char-sets inspect::           Inspection.
* char-sets ops::               Operations.
* char-sets sets::              Predefined character sets.
@end menu

@c page
@node char-sets conv
@section Arguments naming conventions


In the following procedure specifications:

@table @var
@item cs
Is a character set.

@item str
Is a string.

@item char
Is a character.

@item range
Is a pair of characters interpreted as double--closed range of
characters, the car being the lower--limit and the cdr being the
upper--limit.

@item char-list
Is a list of characters.

@item pred
Is a unary character predicate procedure, returning a boolean value when
applied to a character.

@item obj
May be any value at all.
@end table

A parameter followed by @code{...} means zero--or--more elements.

Unless otherwise noted in the specification of a procedure, procedures
always return character sets that are distinct from the parameter
character sets.

@c page
@node char-sets make
@section Constructors


@defun char-set @var{char/range} ...
Build and return a new @code{char-set}.  The @var{char/range} arguments
may be the empty list or a mixed list of characters and ranges.
@end defun


@defun char-set-copy @var{cs}
Return a newly allocated @code{char-set} holding a copy of @var{cs}.
@end defun


@defun char-set-add @var{cs} @var{char/range}
Add values to an existing @var{char-set}.  @var{char/range} can be a
single character or a range.  Return a new instance of @code{char-set};
the returned set may share some structure with the arguments.
@end defun


@defun char-set-add! @var{cs} @var{char/range}
Add values to an existing @var{char-set}.  @var{char/range} can be a
single character or a range.  Return @var{cs} itself; the returned set
may share some structure with the arguments.
@end defun


@defvr Constant char-set-lower-bound
@defvrx Constant char-set-upper-bound
@defvrx Constant char-set-inner-upper-bound
@defvrx Constant char-set-inner-lower-bound
The character sets are defined by the Scheme standard to be in the
ranges @code{[0, #xD800)} and @code{(#xDFFF, #x10FFFF]}.
@library{vicare containers char-sets} exports these symbols, defined as follows:

@example
(define char-set-lower-bound
  (integer->char 0))

(define char-set-inner-upper-bound
  (integer->char (- #xD800 1)))

(define char-set-inner-lower-bound
  (integer->char (+ 1 #xDFFF)))

(define char-set-upper-bound
  (integer->char #x10FFFF))
@end example
@end defvr

@c page
@node char-sets pred
@section Predicates


@defun char-set? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a valid @code{char-set}, else return
@false{}.
@end defun


@defun char-set-empty? @var{cs}
Return @true{} if the @code{char-set} is empty, else return @false{}.
@end defun


@defun char-set-contains? @var{cs} @var{char}
Return @true{} if @var{char} is an element of @var{cs}.
@end defun


@defun char-set=? @var{cs-a} @var{cs-b}
Return @true{} if the arguments represent the same @code{char-set}, else
return @false{}.
@end defun


@defun char-set<? @var{cs-a} @var{cs-b}
Return @true{} if all the elements of @var{cs-a} are strictly less than
all the elements of @var{cs-b}, else return @false{}.  Empty sets cannot
be ordered, so if an argument is empty the return value is @false{}.
@end defun


@defun char-set-subset? @var{cs} ...
@defunx char-set-subset?/strict @var{cs} ...
Return @true{} if the arguments, in the given order, are subsets of each
other or strict subsets of each other, else return @false{}.  When
called with zero or one argument: return @true{}.
@end defun


@defun char-set-superset? @var{cs} ...
@defunx char-set-superset?/strict @var{cs} ...
Return @true{} if the arguments, in the given order, are supersets of
each other or strict supersets of each other, else return @false{}.
When called with zero or one argument: return @true{}.
@end defun

@c page
@node char-sets inspect
@section Inspection


@defun char-set-size @var{cs}
Return an exact integer representing the number of characters in
@var{cs}.
@end defun


@defun char-set-write @var{cs}
@defunx char-set-write @var{cs} @var{port}
Write to @var{port} a chunk of Scheme code that, when evaluated,
generates @var{cs}.  When not given, @var{port} defaults to
@code{(current-output-port)}.
@end defun


@defun char-set-hash @var{cs}
@defunx char-set-hash @var{cs} @var{bound}
Compute a hash value for the character set @var{cs}.  The optional
argument @var{bound} is a non--negative exact integer specifying the
range of the hash function; a positive value restricts the return value
to the range @code{[0, @var{bound})}.

If bound is either zero or not given: the implementation may use an
implementation--specific default value, chosen to be as large as is
efficiently practical.  For instance, the default range might be chosen
for a given implementation to map all strings into the range of integers
that can be represented with a single machine word.

Invariant:

@example
(char-set= cs1 cs2) @result{} (= (char-set-hash cs1 b)
                          (char-set-hash cs2 b))
@end example
@end defun

@c page
@node char-sets ops
@section Operations


@defun char-set-intersection @var{cs0} @var{cs} ...
Return a new set representing the intersection of the arguments; the
intersection is the set of characters present in all the arguments.

The returned set may share some structure with the arguments.
@end defun


@defun char-set-union @var{cs0} @var{cs} ...
Return a new set representing the union of the arguments; the union is
the set of characters present in one and/or more arguments.

The returned set may share some structure with the arguments.
@end defun


@defun char-set-difference @var{cs0} @var{cs} ...
Return a new set representing the difference between the arguments; the
difference is the set of characters present in only one of the
arguments.

The returned set may share some structure with the arguments.
@end defun


@defun char-set-complement @var{cs}
@defunx char-set-complement @var{cs} @var{cs-universe}
Return a new set representing the complement of @var{cs} in
@var{cs-universe}.  The complement is the set of characters present in
@var{cs-universe}, which are not present in @var{cs}.

If omitted, @var{cs-universe} defaults to @code{char-set:full}.

The returned set may share some structure with the arguments.
@end defun


@defun char-set-for-each @var{proc} @var{cs}
Apply @var{proc} to each character in @var{cs}.
@end defun


@defun char-set-every @var{proc} @var{cs}
Apply @var{proc} to each character in the set and return true if all the
return values are true.  The application stops at the first @false{}
return value.
@end defun


@defun char-set-any @var{proc} @var{cs}
Apply @var{proc} to each character in the set and return true if at
least one of the returned values is true.  The application stops at the
first true return value.
@end defun


@defun char-set-fold @var{kons} @var{knil} @var{cs}
Fold @var{kons} over the characters in the set.  @var{kons} must accept
two arguments: The next character from the set and the return value of
the previous invocation of @var{kons}.  At the first application the
second argument to @var{kons} is @var{knil}.
@end defun


@defun char-set->list @var{cs}
Return a list holding all the characters in the set.  Beware that for
some character sets the resulting list can be big.
@end defun


@defun string->char-set @var{string}
Return a new character set holding all the characters in @var{string}.
@end defun


@defun char-set-cursor @var{cs}
@defunx char-set-ref @var{cursor}
@defunx char-set-cursor-next @var{cursor}
@defunx end-of-char-set? @var{cursor}
Cursors are a low--level facility for iterating over the characters in a
set; a cursor is a value that indexes a character in a char set.

@func{char-set-cursor} returns a new cursor object associated to the
character set @var{cs}.  There can be multiple cursors associated to the
same character set.

@func{char-set-ref} returns a character object representing the set
element currently indexed by a cursor.

@func{char-set-cursor-next} increments a cursor index and returns a new
cursor indexing the next character in the set; in this way, code can
step through every character in a char set.

Stepping a cursor ``past the end'' of a char set produces a cursor that
answers true to @func{end-of-char-set?}.  It is an error to pass such a
cursor to @func{char-set-ref} or to @func{char-set-cursor-next}.

A cursor value may not be used in conjunction with a different character
set; if it is passed to @func{char-set-ref} or
@func{char-set-cursor-next} with a character set other than the one used
to create it, the results and effects are undefined.

Cursor values are not necessarily distinct from other types: they may be
integers, linked lists, records, procedures or other values.

Note that these primitives are necessary to export an iteration facility
for char sets to loop macros.

Example:

@example
(define cs (char-set #\G #\a #\T #\e #\c #\h))

;; Collect elts of CS into a list.
(let lp ((cur (char-set-cursor cs)) (ans '()))
  (if (end-of-char-set? cur) ans
      (lp (char-set-cursor-next cs cur)
          (cons (char-set-ref cs cur) ans))))
  @result{} (#\G #\T #\a #\c #\e #\h)

;; Equivalently, using a list unfold (from SRFI 1):
(unfold-right end-of-char-set?
             (curry char-set-ref cs)
      (curry char-set-cursor-next cs)
      (char-set-cursor cs))
  @result{} (#\G #\T #\a #\c #\e #\h)
@end example
@end defun

@c page
@node char-sets sets
@section Predefined character sets


Several character sets are predefined for convenience by @library{vicare
containers char-sets} and other auxiliary libraries.  They are meant to
satisfy the simplest needs.

@menu
* char-sets sets intro::        Introduction.
* char-sets sets how::          How predefined sets were defined.
* char-sets sets basic::        Basic character sets.
* char-sets sets ascii::        Sets of @ascii{} characters.
* char-sets sets blocks::       Sets corresponding to Unicode blocks.
* char-sets sets categories::   Sets corresponding to Unicode general
                                categories.
@end menu

@c page
@node char-sets sets intro
@subsection Introduction


Unicode assigns a single number to each code element defined by the
Standard.  Each of these numbers is called a @dfn{code point} and, when
referred to in text, is listed in hexadecimal form following the prefix
@code{U+}.  For example, the code point @code{U+0041} is the hexadecimal
number @code{0041} (equal to the decimal number @code{65}); it
represents the character @code{A} in the Unicode Standard.

Each character is also assigned a unique name that specifies it and no
other.  For example, @code{U+0041} is assigned the character name
@code{LATIN CAPITAL LETTER A}.  @code{U+0A1B} is assigned the character
name @code{GURMUKHI LETTER CHA}.  These Unicode names are identical to
the @acronym{ISO}/@acronym{IEC} 10646 names for the same characters.

For a general overview of the Unicode Standard see@footnote{@aurl{} last
verified Tue Jun 23, 2009.}:

@center @url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unicode}

For the complete reference of Unicode code points we should inspect the
Unicode Characters Database@footnote{@aurl{}s last verified Tue Jun 23,
2009.}:

@center @url{ftp://ftp.unicode.org/Public/UNIDATA/UnicodeData.txt}
@center @url{ftp://ftp.unicode.org/Public/UNIDATA/Blocks.txt}

@noindent
which is partly and introductorily documented by@footnote{@aurl{} last
verified Tue Jun 23, 2009.}:

@center @url{ftp://ftp.unicode.org/Public/UNIDATA/UCD.html}

@noindent
the same directory on the @url{unicode.org} site offers other documents
on the interpretation of the database.

For an explanation of @ascii{} coding, see@footnote{@aurl{} last
verified Tue Jun 23, 2009.}:

@center @url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ascii}

@c page
@node char-sets sets how
@subsection How predefined sets were defined


The following methods were employed to define the character sets.

@itemize
@item
The @ascii{}--related sets were composed by hand reading the @ascii{}
description; they are exported by the @library{vicare containers
char-sets} library itself.

@item
All the ranges defined by the @file{Blocks.txt} database file have been
converted to a set by hand; they are exported by the @library{vicare
containers char-sets blocks} library (there are a lot of them).

@item
Each general category (@code{Ll}, @code{Lu}, etc.) has been converted to
a set; they are exported by the @library{vicare containers char-sets
categories} library (there are a lot of them).  Notice that not all the
code points accepted by @func{char=?} are part of a general category, so
the union of the category sets is different from the full character set.
@end itemize

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Inspecting the database

On a Unix--like system, the following commands can be used to inspect
the @file{UnicodeData.txt} database:

@table @command
@item wc -l <UnicodeData.txt
Count the lines in the database: One line for each code point.  Notice
that not all the code points have a line in this file; the file format
allows ranges, so some pairs of lines represent ranges of characters.

@item cut -d';' -f3 <UnicodeData.txt | sort | uniq
Print the category codes in the database (use @command{sort} first,
because @command{uniq} removes repeated lines only if they are
adjacent).  Notice that the @code{Cs} category (surrogate characters) is
present in the database, but excluded from the Vicare libraries,
because it describes the range @code{[#xD800, #xDFFF]} forbidden by
@rnrs{6}.

@item grep ';Cs;' <UnicodeData.txt
Print only the lines describing the surrogate characters.  They are six
lines representing the three ranges:

@table @code
@item [#xD800, #xDB7F]
Non private use high surrogate.

@item [#xDB80, #xDBFF]
Private use high surrogate.

@item [#xDC00, #xDFFF]
Low surrogate.
@end table

@noindent
Notice that these ranges are adjacent and their union is the range
@code{[#xD800, #xDFFF]}.

@item grep -v ';Cs;' <UnicodeData.txt | wc -l
Count the lines excluding the surrogate characters.  The count should be
@math{19330} (last verified with the database downloaded Wed Jun 23,
2009).

@item grep ';Ll;' <UnicodeData.txt
Extract all the lines describing the @code{Ll} category.

@item grep ', *\(First\|Last\)>' <UnicodeData.txt
Extract all the lines describing the inclusive limit of a range of
characters.

@item grep -v ', *\(First\|Last\)>' <UnicodeData.txt
Extract all the lines describing a single code point, excluding the
lines describing the limit of a range of characters.
@end table

The following Bourne shell script processes the @file{UnicodeData.txt}
database and prints a Scheme program that, when evaluated, prints the
definitions of category character sets.  The output script program makes
use of the @library{vicare containers char-sets} library itself.

@smallexample
# unicode-database-extract-category-code-points.sh --
#

DATABASE=$@{1:?'missing UnicodeData.txt pathname'@}

CATEGORY_CODES=$(cut -d';' -f3 <"$DATABASE" | sort | uniq | grep -v Cs)

echo '(import (rnrs) (vicare containers char-sets))'

for CATEGORY in $CATEGORY_CODES
do
    echo processing category $CATEGORY >&2
    echo -n "(define category-$CATEGORY (quote ("
    @{
        grep ";$CATEGORY;" <"$DATABASE"   | \
            grep -v ', *\(First\|Last\)>' | \
            cut -d';' -f1                 | \
            while read
        do echo -n "#\x$REPLY "
        done

        grep ";$CATEGORY;" <"$DATABASE"   | \
            grep ', *\(First\|Last\)>'    | \
            cut -d';' -f1                 | \
            while read
        do
            FIRST=$REPLY
            read
            LAST=$REPLY
            echo -n "(#\x$FIRST . #\x$LAST) "
        done
    @}
    echo ')))'
    echo "(display \"(define char-set:category/$CATEGORY\")(newline)"
    echo "(char-set-write (apply char-set category-$CATEGORY))(newline)"
    echo '(display ")")(newline)'
    echo
done

### end of file
@end smallexample

@noindent
For example, the output for the @code{Co} category, which has only
ranges, is (reformatted to look human readable):

@example
(define category-Co (quote ((#\xE000 . #\xF8FF)
                            (#\xF0000 . #\xFFFFD)
                            (#\x100000 . #\x10FFFD))))

(display "(define char-set:category/Co")
(newline)
(char-set-write (apply char-set category-Co))
(newline)
(display ")")
(newline)
@end example

@c page
@node char-sets sets basic
@subsection Basic character sets


The following character sets are defined and exported by the
@library{vicare containers char-sets} library.


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:full
Contains all the characters recognised by the @rnrs{6} standard.
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:empty
The empty set.
@end defvr

@c page
@node char-sets sets ascii
@subsection Sets of @ascii{} characters


The following character sets are defined and exported by the
@library{vicare containers char-sets} library.


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii
All the characters in the @ascii{} set.  It is the set of all the
characters whose numeric code is between 0 and 127, both included.
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii/lower-case
All the lower--case letters between @code{#\a} and @code{#\z}, included.
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii/upper-case
All the upper--case letters between @code{#\A} and @code{#\Z}, included.
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii/letter
All the letters: It is the union of @code{char-set:ascii/lower-case} and
@code{char-set:ascii/upper-case}.
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii/digit
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:ascii/dec-digit
All the decimal digits:

@example
#\0 #\1 #\2 #\3 #\4 #\5 #\6 #\7 #\8 #\9
@end example
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii/oct-digit
All the octal digits:

@example
#\0 #\1 #\2 #\3 #\4 #\5 #\6 #\7
@end example
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii/hex-digit
All the hexadecimal digits:

@example
#\0 #\1 #\2 #\3 #\4 #\5 #\6 #\7 #\8 #\9
#\a #\b #\c #\d #\e #\f
#\A #\B #\C #\D #\E #\F
@end example
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii/letter+digit
All the letters and decimal digits: It is the union of
@code{char-set:ascii/letter} and @code{char-set:ascii/dec-digit}.
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii/punctuation
All the punctuation characters whose numeric code is in the range
@math{[0, 127]}:

@c Yes I have verified that all of these have numeric code in the range
@c [0, 127] (Marco Maggi, Tue Jun 23, 2009).
@example
@c Keep two spaces between the characters.  Also keep an empty line
@c between them.
#\!  #\"  #\#  #\%  #\&  #\'  #\(  #\)  #\*  #\,  #\-  #\.

#\/  #\:  #\;  #\?  #\@@  #\[  #\\  #\]  #\_  #\@{  #\@}
@end example
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii/symbol
All the symbol characters whose numeric code is in the range @math{[0,
127]}:

@c Yes I have verified that all of these have numeric code in the range
@c [0, 127] (Marco Maggi, Tue Jun 23, 2009).
@example
@c Keep two spaces between the characters.
#\$  #\+  #\<  #\=  #\>  #\^  #\`  #\|  #\~
@end example
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii/whitespace
All the characters representing white space:

@example
#x0009  #\tab       ; HORIZONTAL TABULATION
#x000A  #\linefeed  ; LINE FEED
#x000B  #\vtab      ; VERTICAL TABULATION
#x000C  #\page      ; FORM FEED
#x000D  #\return    ; CARRIAGE RETURN
#x0020  #\space     ; SPACE
@end example
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii/blank
A set holding @code{#\tab} and @code{#\space}.
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii/graphic
The set of all characters that put ink on the page.  It is the union of
@code{char-set:ascii/letter+digit}, @code{char-set:ascii/punctuation}
and @code{char-set:ascii/symbol}.
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii/printable
The set of all the printable characters.  It is the union of
@code{char-set:ascii/whitespace} and @code{char-set:ascii/graphic}.
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii/control
All the characters whose numeric code is in the range @math{[0, 31]}
plus @math{127}.
@end defvr


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:ascii/vowels
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:ascii/consonants
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:ascii/vowels/lower-case
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:ascii/consonants/lower-case
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:ascii/vowels/upper-case
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:ascii/consonants/upper-case
Sets of vowels and consonants.  Notice that lower case vowels are:
@code{#\a}, @code{#\e}, @code{#\i}, @code{#\o}, @code{#\u}.
@end defvr

@c page
@node char-sets sets blocks
@subsection Sets corresponding to Unicode blocks


The following character sets are defined and exported by the
@library{vicare containers char-sets blocks} library.


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:block/basic-latin
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/latin-1-supplement
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/latin-extended-a
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/latin-extended-b
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/ipa-extensions
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/spacing-modifier-letters
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/combining-diacritical-marks
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/greek-and-coptic
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cyrillic
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cyrillic-supplement
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/armenian
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/hebrew
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/arabic
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/syriac
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/arabic-supplement
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/thaana
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/nko
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/devanagari
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/bengali
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/gurmukhi
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/gujarati
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/oriya
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/tamil
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/telugu
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/kannada
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/malayalam
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/sinhala
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/thai
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/lao
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/tibetan
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/myanmar
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/georgian
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/hangul-jamo
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/ethiopic
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/ethiopic-supplement
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cherokee
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/unified-canadian-aboriginal-syllabics
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/ogham
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/runic
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/tagalog
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/hanunoo
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/buhid
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/tagbanwa
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/khmer
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/mongolian
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/limbu
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/tai-le
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/new-tai-lue
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/khmer-symbols
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/buginese
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/balinese
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/sundanese
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/lepcha
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/ol-chiki
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/phonetic-extensions
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/phonetic-extensions-supplement
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/combining-diacritical-marks-supplement
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/latin-extended-additional
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/greek-extended
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/general-punctuation
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/superscripts-and-subscripts
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/currency-symbols
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/combining-diacritical-mark-for-symbols
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/letterlike-symbols
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/number-forms
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/arrows
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/mathematical-operators
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/miscellaneous-technical
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/control-pictures
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/optical-character-recognition
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/enclosed-alphanumerics
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/box-drawing
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/block-elements
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/geometric-shapes
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/miscellaneous-symbols
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/dingbats
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/miscellaneous-mathematical-symbols-a
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/supplemental-arrows-a
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/braille-patterns
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/supplemental-arrows-b
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/miscellaneous-mathematical-symbols-b
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/supplemental-mathematical-operators
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/miscellaneous-symbols-and-arrows
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/glagolitic
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/latin-extended-c
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/coptic
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/georgian-supplement
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/tifinagh
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/ethiopic-extended
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cyrillic-extended-a
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/supplemental-punctuation
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cjk-radicals-supplement
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/kangxi-radicals
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/ideographic-description-characters
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cjk-symbols-and-punctuation
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/hiragana
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/katakana
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/bopomofo
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/hangul-compatibility-jamo
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/kanbun
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/bopomofo-extended
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cjk-strokes
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/katakana-phonetic-extensions
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/enclosed-cjk-letters-and-months
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cjk-compatibility
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cjk-unified-Ideographs-extension-a
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/yijing-hexagram-symbols
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cjk-unified-ideographs
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/yi-syllables
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/yi-radicals
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/vai
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cyrillic-extended-b
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/modifier-tone-letters
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/latin-extended-d
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/syloti-nagri
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/phags-pa
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/saurashtra
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/kayah-li
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/Rejang
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cham
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/hangul-syllables
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/private-use-area
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cjk-compatibility-ideographs
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/alphabetic-presentation-forms
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/arabic-presentation-forms-a
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/variation-selectors
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/vertical-forms
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/combining-half-marks
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cjk-compatibility-forms
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/small-form-variants
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/arabic-presentation-forms-b
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/halfwidth-and-fullwidth-forms
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/specials
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/linear-b-syllabary
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/linear-b-ideograms
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/aegean-numbers
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/ancient-greek-numbers
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/ancient-symbols
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/phaistos-disc
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/lycian
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/carian
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/old-italic
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/gothic
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/ugaritic
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/old-persian
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/deseret
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/shavian
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/osmanya
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cypriot-syllabary
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/phoenician
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/lydian
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/kharoshthi
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cuneiform
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cuneiform-numbers-and-punctuation
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/byzantine-musical-symbols
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/musical-symbols
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/ancient-greek-musical-notation
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/tai-xuan-jing-symbols
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/counting-rod-numerals
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/mathematical-alphanumeric-symbols
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/mahjong-tiles
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/domino-tiles
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cjk-unified-ideographs-extension-b
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/cjk-compatibility-ideographs-supplement
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/tags
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/variation-selectors-supplement
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/supplementary-private-use-area-a
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:block/supplementary-private-use-area-b
These are the character sets corresponding to the ranges defined in the
@file{Blocks.txt} file of the Unicode Character Database.
@end defvr

@c page
@node char-sets sets categories
@subsection Sets corresponding to Unicode general categories


The following character sets are defined and exported by the
@library{vicare containers char-sets categories} library.

Notice that not all the code points accepted by @func{char=?} are part
of a general category, so the union of the category sets is different
from the full character set @code{char-set:full}.

Categories are disjoint, so the intersection of the category sets is the
empty set.


@defvr {Character Set} char-set:letter-uppercase
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:letter-lowercase
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:letter-titlecase
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:letter-modifier
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:letter-other
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:mark-nospacing
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:mark-spacing-combining
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:mark-enclosing
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:number-decimal-digit
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:number-letter
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:number-other
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:puncutation-connector
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:punctuation-dash
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:punctuation-open
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:punctuation-close
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:punctuation-initial-quote
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:punctuation-final-quote
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:punctuation-other
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:symbol-math
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:symbol-currency
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:symbol-modifier
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:symbol-other
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:separator-space
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:separator-line
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:separator-paragraph
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:control
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:format
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:surrogate
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:private-use
@defvrx {Character Set} char-set:not-assigned
One set for each general category defined by the Unicode Standard.
@end defvr

@c end of file
