@node wtables
@chapter Weak hashtables


@cindex Library @library{vicare containers weak-hashtables}
@cindex @library{vicare containers weak-hashtables}, library


Weak hashtables are associative containers whose keys are held by weak
references: registering a key into a weak hashtable does not prevent its
garbage collection.  A weak hashtable is a Scheme vector holding nulls
or associative lists; each vector slot is called @dfn{bucket}; the
associative lists have the spine composed of strong pairs, while the
entries are weak pairs:

@example
|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----| vector of buckets
         |
         v
      |-----|-----|strong pair
         |      |
         |       ------------> |-----|-----|strong pair
         |                        |     |
      |-----|-----|weak pair      |      -------> null
        key  value                v
                               |-----|-----| weak pair
                                 key  value
@end example

Whenever a key in a weak hashtable is garbage collected: the
corresponding location in the weak pair is set to the @acronym{BWP}
object (a special unique object that has this exact purpose); whenever a
bucket is accessed, it is first cleared of weak pairs holding
@acronym{BWP} in key position.

@quotation
@strong{NOTE} Immediate values (those that fit into a single machine
word: @true{}, @false{}, nil, fixnums, characters, etc.)@: and interned
symbols are @strong{never} garbage collected.  If we use them as weak
hashtable keys: the associated entries will never be removed from the
table unless we explicitly do it with @func{weak-hashtable-delete!}  or
@func{weak-hashtable-clear!}.
@end quotation

When the number of collected objects equals the number of buckets
(whatever the distribution of elements), the table is enlarged doubling
the number of buckets; the table is @strong{never} restricted by
reducing the number of buckets.

At present, weak hashtables are subjected to the following constraints:

@itemize
@item
The number of buckets is always an exact power of @math{2}.

@item
The maximum number of buckets is the value of @code{(greatest-fixnum)}.

@item
The maximum number of entries is the value of @code{(greatest-fixnum)}.
@end itemize

The @api{} of weak hashtables is similar to the @api{} of @rnrs{6}
hashtables.  The following bindings are exported by the library
@library{vicare containers weak-hashtables}.


@defun make-weak-hashtable @var{hash-function} @var{equiv-function}
@defunx make-weak-hashtable @var{hash-function} @var{equiv-function} @var{dimension}
Build and return a new weak hashtable using @var{hash-function} as hash
function for keys and @var{equiv-function} as comparison function
between keys.  When @var{dimension} is used: it is approximately the
initial number of buckets; when not used it defaults to @math{16}.
@end defun


@defun weak-hashtable? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a weak hashtable, otherwise @false{}.
Weak hashtables are disjoint values.
@end defun


@deffn {Validation Clause} weak-hashtable @var{obj}
Validation clause to be used with the facilities of the library
@library{vicare arguments validation}.  Succeed if @var{obj} is an
instance of @code{weak-hashtable}.
@end deffn


@defun weak-hashtable-set! @var{table} @var{key} @var{value}
Add an entry to @var{table} holding @var{key} and @var{value}.  Return
unspecified values.
@end defun


@defun weak-hashtable-ref @var{table} @var{key} @var{default}
Search for @var{key} in @var{table}; if found: return the corresponding
value, else return @var{default}.
@end defun


@defun weak-hashtable-contains? @var{table} @var{key}
Return @true{} if @var{table} contains an entry for @var{key}, else
return @false{}.
@end defun


@defun weak-hashtable-delete! @var{table} @var{key}
If @var{key} is in @var{table}: remove it, else do nothing.  Return
unspecified values.
@end defun


@defun weak-hashtable-size @var{table}
Return the approximate number of entries in @var{table}.  The returned
value can be incorrect if some keys have been garbage collected but the
corresponding entries in the table are not yet removed.
@end defun


@defun weak-hashtable-clear! @var{table}
Remove all the entries from @var{table}.  The number of buckets is reset
to the its initial value.  Return unspecified values.
@end defun


@defun weak-hashtable-keys @var{table}
Return a vector holding the keys in @var{table}.
@end defun


@defun weak-hashtable-entries @var{table}
Return two values: a vector holding the keys in @var{table}, a vector
holding the values in @var{table}.
@end defun


@defun weak-hashtable-update! @var{table} @var{key} @var{proc} @var{default}
If no entry exists for @var{key} in @var{table}: create a new entry
associating @var{key} to the result of applying @var{proc} to
@var{default}.

If an entry exists for @var{key} in @var{table}: replace its value with
the result of applying @var{proc} to the old value.
@end defun

@c end of file
