@c macros

@ignore
This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU General Public License version 3 as published
by the Free Software Foundation.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
@end ignore

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Licensing macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro gnu{}
@acronym{GNU}
@end macro

@macro gpl{}
@acronym{GPL}
@end macro

@macro fdl{}
@acronym{FDL}
@end macro

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Special notes.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro forunix{}
@strong{Unix:}
@end macro

@macro fixme{TEXT}
@strong{FIXME: \TEXT\}
@end macro

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Scheme related macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro rnrs{VERSION}
@acronym{R\VERSION\RS}
@end macro

@macro rsix{}
Revised^6 Report on the algorithmic language Scheme
@end macro

@macro repl{}
@acronym{REPL}
@end macro

@macro srfi{}
@acronym{SRFI}
@end macro

@c Separating the @srfi{} macro from the number with a '--' rather than
@c a '-'  makes the expansion look  ugly in menu entries  under the Info
@c reader.  IMHO  this should not happen,  but it does; so  we live with
@c this, because the main purpose of this document is to provide an Info
@c version.
@macro ansrfi{NUM}
@srfi{}-\NUM\
@end macro

@macro clos{}
@acronym{CLOS}
@end macro

@macro oop{}
@acronym{OOP}
@end macro

@macro oopp{}
@acronym{OOPP}
@end macro

@macro library{SPEC}
@code{(\SPEC\)}
@end macro

@macro ffi{}
@acronym{FFI}
@end macro

@macro class{NAME}
@code{<\NAME\>}
@end macro

@macro aclass{NAME}
<\NAME\>
@end macro

@macro cclass{NAME}
<\NAME\>
@end macro

@macro objtype{NAME}
@code{\NAME\}
@end macro

@macro aobjtype{NAME}
\NAME\
@end macro

@macro cobjtype{NAME}
\NAME\
@end macro

@macro clause{NAME}
@code{\NAME\}
@end macro

@macro condition{NAME}
@code{&\NAME\}
@end macro

@macro acondition{NAME}
&\NAME\
@end macro

@macro namesp{NAME}
@code{<<\NAME\>>}
@end macro

@macro anamesp{NAME}
<<\NAME\>>
@end macro

@macro cnamesp{NAME}
<<\NAME\>>
@end macro

@macro enum{NAME}
@code{enum-\NAME\}
@end macro

@macro rtd{}
@acronym{RTD}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c To be used inside argument lists.

@macro ameta{THING}
<\THING\>
@end macro

@macro ametao{THING}
<\THING\0>
@end macro

@macro ametai{THING}
<\THING\1>
@end macro

@macro ametaii{THING}
<\THING\2>
@end macro

@macro ametaiii{THING}
<\THING\3>
@end macro

@macro ametan{THING}
<\THING\N>
@end macro

@macro ametani{THING}
<\THING\N+1>
@end macro

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Miscellaneous acronyms.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro ansi{}
@acronym{ANSI}
@end macro

@macro api{}
@acronym{API}
@end macro

@c Remember that @url is already used by Texinfo.
@macro aurl{}
@acronym{URL}
@end macro

@macro vurl{DATE}
(@acronym{URL} last verified \DATE\)
@end macro

@macro ascii{}
@acronym{ASCII}
@end macro

@macro asciiz{}
@acronym{ASCIIZ}
@end macro

@macro axml{}
@acronym{XML}
@end macro

@macro cpu{}
@acronym{CPU}
@end macro

@macro csv{}
@acronym{CSV}
@end macro

@macro dns{}
@acronym{DNS}
@end macro

@macro dtd{}
@acronym{DTD}
@end macro

@macro dom{}
@acronym{DOM}
@end macro

@macro eof{}
@acronym{EOF}
@end macro

@macro ieee{}
@acronym{IEEE}
@end macro

@macro iso{}
@acronym{ISO}
@end macro

@macro json{}
@acronym{JSON}
@end macro

@macro posix{}
@acronym{POSIX}
@end macro

@macro rfc{}
@acronym{RFC}
@end macro

@macro uid{}
@acronym{UID}
@end macro

@macro uri{}
@acronym{URI}
@end macro

@macro utf{}
@acronym{UTF}
@end macro

@macro utc{}
@acronym{UTC}
@end macro

@macro tai{}
@acronym{TAI}
@end macro

@macro dst{}
@acronym{DST}
@end macro

@macro gmt{}
@acronym{GMT}
@end macro

@macro jdn{}
@acronym{JDN}
@end macro

@macro mjdn{}
@acronym{MJDN}
@end macro

@macro sax{}
@acronym{SAX}
@end macro

@macro ssax{}
@acronym{SSAX}
@end macro

@macro sxml{}
@acronym{SXML}
@end macro

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Software acronyms.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro gmp{}
@acronym{GMP}
@end macro

@macro gcc{}
@acronym{GCC}
@end macro

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Network related acronyms.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro http{}
@acronym{HTTP}
@end macro

@macro ftp{}
@acronym{FTP}
@end macro

@macro ip{}
@acronym{IP}
@end macro

@macro icmp{}
@acronym{ICMP}
@end macro

@macro tcp{}
@acronym{TCP}
@end macro

@macro udp{}
@acronym{UDP}
@end macro

@macro smtp{}
@acronym{SMTP}
@end macro

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Scheme language macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro func{NAME}
@code{\NAME\}
@end macro

@macro snull{}
@code{()}
@end macro

@macro true{}
@code{#t}
@end macro

@macro false{}
@code{#f}
@end macro

@macro keyword{NAME}
@code{#:\NAME\}
@end macro

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c C language macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro cfunc{NAME}
@code{\NAME\()}
@end macro

@macro cnull{}
@code{NULL}
@end macro

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Macros for references to external documents.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro glibcref{NODE, TITLE}
@ref{\NODE\,\TITLE\,\TITLE\,libc}
@end macro

@c @macro rsixref{NODE, TITLE}
@c @ref{\NODE\,\TITLE\,\TITLE\,r6rs}
@c @end macro

@macro bibref{TAG}
@code{[\TAG\]}
@end macro

@macro autoconfref{NODE, TITLE}
@ref{\NODE\,\TITLE\,\TITLE\,autoconf}
@end macro

@macro vicareref{NODE, TITLE}
@ref{\NODE\,\TITLE\,\TITLE\,vicare-scheme}
@end macro

@macro libsref{NODE, TITLE}
@ref{\NODE\,\TITLE\,\TITLE\,vicare-libs}
@end macro

@macro nauref{NODE, TITLE}
@ref{\NODE\,\TITLE\,\TITLE\,nausicaa}
@end macro

@macro mehveref{NODE, TITLE}
@ref{\NODE\,\TITLE\,\TITLE\,mehve}
@end macro

@macro manpage{NODE, TITLE}
@ref{\NODE\,\TITLE\,\TITLE\,*manpages*}
@end macro

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c RNRS document macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro rsixlibrary{THING}
@code{(rnrs \THING\ (6))}
@end macro

@c The  following  macro does  not  work.  It  appears  that  it is  not
@c possible to use "@cindex" in the expansion of a macro because the DVI
@c output  will not work.   Texinfo output  would work,  though.  Tested
@c with "texi2dvi" version 1.135 (GNU Texinfo 4.13).
@c
@c @macro cindexRsixlibrary{THING}
@c @cindex @rsixlibrary{\THING\}, library
@c @cindex Library, @rsixlibrary{\THING\}
@c @end macro

@macro arbno{THING}
\THING\*
@end macro

@macro atleastone{THING}
\THING\+
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c To be used in normal text.

@macro meta{THING}
@var{?\THING\}
@end macro

@macro metao{THING}
@var{?\THING\0}
@end macro

@macro metai{THING}
@var{?\THING\1}
@end macro

@macro metaii{THING}
@var{?\THING\2}
@end macro

@macro metaiii{THING}
@var{?\THING\3}
@end macro

@macro metan{THING}
@var{?\THING\N}
@end macro

@macro metani{THING}
@var{?\THING\N+1}
@end macro

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@macro varo{THING}
@var{\THING\0}
@end macro

@macro vari{THING}
@var{\THING\1}
@end macro

@macro varii{THING}
@var{\THING\2}
@end macro

@macro variii{THING}
@var{\THING\3}
@end macro

@macro variv{THING}
@var{\THING\4}
@end macro

@macro varn{THING}
@var{\THING\n}
@end macro

@macro varni{THING}
@var{\THING\n+1}
@end macro

@macro vark{THING}
@var{\THING\k}
@end macro

@macro varj{THING}
@var{\THING\j}
@end macro

@c end of file
