\input texinfo.tex
@c %**start of header
@setfilename mehve.info
@settitle Mehve for Vicare Scheme
@c %**end of header

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@include version-mehve.texi
@include macros.texi

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Values.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@set PRJNAME                    Vicare

@set TITLE                      Mehve for Vicare Scheme

@c To be used as @value{PACKAGE} whenever we need to include the full
@c name of this package.
@set PACKAGE                    Vicare Scheme

@c To be used as @value{PACKAGE} whenever we need to include the
@c nickname of the project: the name that is used to compose the
@c distribution tarball or the web address.
@set PACKAGE_NICKNAME           vicare-scheme

@c To be used as @value{AUTHOR} whenever we need to include the list of
@c authors of this document.
@set AUTHOR                     Marco Maggi

@c To be used as @value{AUTHOR_EMAIL} whenever we need to include the
@c email of the *single* author of this document.
@set AUTHOR_EMAIL               @email{marco.maggi-ipsu@@poste.it}

@c To be used as @value{COPYRIGHT_YEARS} whenever we need to include the
@c list of copyright years.
@set COPYRIGHT_YEARS            2011-2013

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Copyright notice.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@copying
This document describes Mehve, a collection of libraries for
@value{PACKAGE} version @value{VERSION}, implementing the language
@library{nausicaa mehve} on top of @library{nausicaa}.

@noindent
Copyright @copyright{} @value{COPYRIGHT_YEARS} by @value{AUTHOR} @value{AUTHOR_EMAIL}

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the @gnu{} Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with
Invariant Sections being ``@gnu{} Free Documentation License'' and
``@gnu{} General Public License'', no Front--Cover Texts, and no
Back--Cover Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section
entitled ``@gnu{} Free Documentation License''.
@end quotation
@end copying

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Headers.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@titlepage
@title @value{TITLE}
@subtitle Revision @value{VERSION}
@author @value{AUTHOR} @value{AUTHOR_EMAIL}
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@ifinfo
@dircategory Development
@direntry
* mehve: (mehve).               @value{TITLE}.
@end direntry
@end ifinfo

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@ignore
@syncodeindex tp cp
@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex fn cp
@end ignore

@c page
@ifnottex
@node Top
@top @value{TITLE}

@insertcopying

@menu
* overview::                    Overview of the package.
* mehve::                       The language @library{nausicaa mehve}.

Appendices

* Package License::             @gnu{} General Public License.
* Documentation License::       @gnu{} Free Documentation License.

Indexes

* concept index::               An entry for each concept.
* function index::              An entry for each function.
* variable index::              An entry for each variable.
* type index::                  An entry for each type.
@end menu
@end ifnottex

@c page
@node overview
@chapter Overview of the package


This document describes Mehve, a collection of libraries for
@value{PACKAGE} version @value{VERSION}, implementing the language
@library{nausicaa mehve} on top of @library{nausicaa}, @nauref{nausicaa,
The language @library{nausicaa}}.

@library{nausicaa mehve} defines the same language of
@library{nausicaa}, but it redefines some bindings to functions as
bindings to multimethods and so they can be customised with specialised
methods, @nauref{multimethods, Multimethods dispatching}.

Multimethods are significantly slower than functions, so, while more
flexible, Mehve is not for every application.

Before making use of the facilities of Mehve, we @strong{must} call the
function @func{initialise-mehve}.

@c page
@c Libraries in the Mehve language

@include mehve-language.texi

@c page

@include gpl-3.0.texi
@include fdl-1.3.texi

@c page
@node concept index
@appendix An entry for each concept

@printindex cp

@node function index
@appendix An entry for each function.

@printindex fn

@node variable index
@appendix An entry for each variable.

@printindex vr

@node type index
@appendix An entry for each type.

@printindex tp

@contents
@bye

@c end of file

