@node stacks
@chapter Simple stacks


@cindex @library{nausicaa containers stacks}, library
@cindex Library @library{nausicaa containers stacks}


The library @library{nausicaa containers stacks} implements stacks
holding arbitrary scheme objects and designed for efficient
last--in/first--out operations; it is built on top of @library{vicare
containers stacks}.

@menu
* stacks objects::              Stack objects.
* stacks inspection::           Inspecting stack objects.
* stacks access::               Stack accessors and mutators.
* stacks conversion::           Converting stacks to other objects.
@end menu

@c page
@node stacks objects
@section Stack objects


The following bindings are exported by the library @library{vicare
containers stacks}.


@deftp {Label Type} @aclass{stack}
@cindex @var{stack} argument
@cindex Argument @var{stack}
Label type to be used to handle @objtype{stack} objects as defined by
@library{vicare containers stacks}.  In this documentation @class{stack}
object arguments to functions are indicated as @var{stack}.
@end deftp


@defop {Default constructor} @aclass{stack} constructor @var{obj} @dots{}
Build and return a @class{stack} object holding the given objects, which
are pushed on the stack from right to left.
@end defop


@deffn Syntax @aclass{stack} (@var{obj} @dots{})
Build and return a @class{stack} object using the default constructor.
@end deffn

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Object properties


@defmethod @aclass{stack} putprop @var{key} @var{value}
@defmethodx @aclass{stack} $putprop @var{key} @var{value}
Add a new property @var{key} to the property list of the @class{stack};
@var{key} must be a symbol.  If @var{key} is already set: the old entry
is mutated to reference the new @var{value}.
@end defmethod


@defmethod @aclass{stack} getprop @var{stack} @var{key}
@defmethodx @aclass{stack} $getprop @var{stack} @var{key}
Return the value of the property @var{key} in the property list of the
@class{stack}; if @var{key} is not set: return @false{}.  @var{key} must
be a symbol.
@end defmethod


@defmethod @aclass{stack} remprop @var{stack} @var{key}
@defmethodx @aclass{stack} $remprop @var{stack} @var{key}
Remove the property @var{key} from the property list of the
@class{stack}; if @var{key} is not set: nothing happens.  @var{key} must
be a symbol.
@end defmethod


@defmethod @aclass{stack} property-list @var{stack}
@defmethodx @aclass{stack} $property-list @var{stack}
Return a new association list representing the property list of the
@class{stack}.  The order of the entries is the same as the property
creation order.
@end defmethod

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Other operations


@defmethod @aclass{stack} hash @var{stack}
@defmethodx @aclass{stack} $hash @var{stack}
Return an exact integer to be used as hashtable key for the
@class{stack}.  Hashtables having a @class{stack} as key can be
instantiated as follows:

@example
(make-hashtable (lambda ((S <stack>))
                  (S hash))
                eq?)
@end example
@end defmethod

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Arguments validation


The following bindings are meant to be used with the facilities of the
library @library{vicare arguments validation}.


@deffn {Validation Clause} @aclass{stack} @var{obj}
@deffnx {Validation Clause} @aclass{stack}/false @var{obj}
Succeed if @var{obj} is a @class{stack} object; the second clause also
accepts @false{}.
@end deffn

@c page
@node stacks inspection
@section Inspecting stack objects


The following bindings are exported by the library @library{vicare
containers stacks}.  The bindings whose name is prefixed with @code{$}
are unsafe operations: they do @strong{not} validate their arguments
before accessing them.


@deftypecv {Immutable virtual field} @aclass{stack} @aclass{boolean} empty?
@deftypecvx {Immutable virtual field} @aclass{stack} @aclass{boolean} $empty?
A boolean, @true{} if @var{stack} is empty; otherwise return @false{}.
@end deftypecv


@deftypecv {Immutable virtual field} @aclass{stack} @aclass{boolean} not-empty?
@deftypecvx {Immutable virtual field} @aclass{stack} @aclass{boolean} $not-empty?
A boolean, @true{} if @var{stack} is @strong{not} empty; otherwise
return @false{}.
@end deftypecv


@deftypecv {Immutable virtual field} @aclass{stack} @aclass{integer} size
@deftypecvx {Immutable virtual field} @aclass{stack} @aclass{integer} $size
An exact integer representing the number of objects in @var{stack}.
@end deftypecv

@c page
@node stacks access
@section Stack accessors and mutators


The following bindings are exported by the library @library{vicare
containers stacks}.  The bindings whose name is prefixed with @code{$}
are unsafe operations: they do @strong{not} validate their arguments
before accessing them.


@defmethod @aclass{stack} top
@defmethodx @aclass{stack} $top
Return the object at the top of the stack.  Raise an assertion violation
if the instance is empty.
@end defmethod


@defmethod @aclass{stack} push! @var{obj}
@defmethodx @aclass{stack} $push! @var{obj}
Push @var{obj} on the @class{stack}.
@end defmethod


@defmethod @aclass{stack} pop!
@defmethodx @aclass{stack} $pop!
Remove the object at the top of the @class{stack} and return it.  Raise
an assertion violation if @var{stack} is empty.
@end defmethod

@c page
@node stacks conversion
@section Converting stacks to other objects


The following bindings are exported by the library @library{vicare
containers stacks}.  The bindings whose name is prefixed with @code{$}
are unsafe operations: they do @strong{not} validate their arguments
before accessing them.


@defmethod @aclass{stack} list
@defmethodx @aclass{stack} $list
Return null or a proper list holding the objects from the @class{stack},
top first.
@end defmethod


@defun list->stack @var{list}
Convert a proper list to a @class{stack} object; objects from the list
are pushed on the stack from right to left.

@example
(import (nausicaa)
  (nausicaa containers stacks))

(<stack> S (list->stack '(1 2 3)))

(S top)         @result{} 1
@end example
@end defun


@defmethod @aclass{stack} vector
@defmethodx @aclass{stack} $vector
Return a vector holding the objects from the @class{stack}, top first.
@end defmethod


@defun vector->stack @var{vector}
Convert a vector to a @class{stack} object; objects from the vector are
pushed on the stack from right to left.
@end defun

@c end of file
