\input texinfo.tex
@c %**start of header
@setfilename nausicaa.info
@settitle Nausicaa for Vicare Scheme
@c %**end of header

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@include version-nausicaa.texi
@include macros.texi

@macro oopp{}
@acronym{OOPP}
@end macro

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Values.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@set TITLE                      Nausicaa for Vicare Scheme

@c To be used as @value{PACKAGE} whenever we need to include the full
@c name of this package.
@set PACKAGE                    Vicare Scheme

@c To be used as @value{PACKAGE} whenever we need to include the
@c nickname of the project: the name that is used to compose the
@c distribution tarball or the web address.
@set PACKAGE_NICKNAME           vicare-scheme

@c To be used as @value{AUTHOR} whenever we need to include the list of
@c authors of this document.
@set AUTHOR                     Marco Maggi

@c To be used as @value{AUTHOR_EMAIL} whenever we need to include the
@c email of the *single* author of this document.
@set AUTHOR_EMAIL               @email{marco.maggi-ipsu@@poste.it}

@c To be used as @value{COPYRIGHT_YEARS} whenever we need to include the
@c list of copyright years.
@set COPYRIGHT_YEARS            2012, 2013


@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Copyright notice.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@copying
This document describes version @value{VERSION} of Nausicaa, a
collection of libraries for @value{PACKAGE} implementing the language
@library{nausicaa} on top of @library{vicare}.

@noindent
Copyright @copyright{} @value{COPYRIGHT_YEARS} by @value{AUTHOR} @value{AUTHOR_EMAIL}

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the @gnu{} Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with
Invariant Sections being ``@gnu{} Free Documentation License'' and
``@gnu{} General Public License'', no Front--Cover Texts, and no
Back--Cover Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section
entitled ``@gnu{} Free Documentation License''.
@end quotation
@end copying

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Headers.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@titlepage
@title @value{TITLE}
@subtitle Revision @value{VERSION}
@author @value{AUTHOR} @value{AUTHOR_EMAIL}
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@ifinfo
@dircategory Development
@direntry
* nausicaa: (nausicaa).         @value{TITLE}.
@end direntry
@end ifinfo

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@ignore
@syncodeindex tp cp
@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex fn cp
@end ignore

@c page
@ifnottex
@node Top
@top @value{TITLE}

@insertcopying

@menu
* overview::                    Overview of the package.
* nausicaa::                    The language @library{nausicaa}.

Libraries in the language @library{nausicaa}

* oopp::                        Object-Oriented Perfumed Programming.
* multimethods::                Multimethods dispatching.
* builtins::                    Conventional labels for built-in objects.
* conditions::                  Condition object types.
* increments::                  Numeric increment syntaxes.
* simple-match::                Simple destructuring match syntax.
* infix::                       Infix to prefix transformer.

Library groups

* containers::                  Containers libraries.
* uri::                         Uniform Resource Identifiers (@uri{}).
* parser-tools::                Lexers and parsers.
* net::                         Networking.

Appendices

* Package License::             @gnu{} General Public License.
* Documentation License::       @gnu{} Free Documentation License.

Indexes

* concept index::               An entry for each concept.
* function index::              An entry for each function.
* variable index::              An entry for each variable.
* type index::                  An entry for each type.
@end menu
@end ifnottex

@c page
@node overview
@chapter Overview of the package


This document describes version @value{VERSION} of Nausicaa, a
collection of libraries for @value{PACKAGE} implementing the language
@library{nausicaa} on top of @library{vicare}.

Scheme is not a typed language and Nausicaa does not change this; the
libraries in this package allow a coding style similar to moving around
@code{void *} pointers in the C language and then casting them to data
structure pointers when needed; the resulting syntax resembles the one
of object--oriented languages, but it just has the perfume of
@acronym{OOP}.

@c page
@c Libraries in the Nausicaa language

@include nausicaa-language.texi
@include nausicaa-oopp.texi
@include nausicaa-multimethods.texi
@include nausicaa-builtins.texi
@include nausicaa-conditions.texi
@include nausicaa-increments.texi
@include nausicaa-simple-match.texi
@include nausicaa-infix.texi

@c page
@node containers
@chapter Containers libraries


@menu
* containers lists::            Extended lists processing.
* containers vectors::          Extended vectors processing.
* containers strings::          Extended strings processing.
* containers arrays::           Multidimensional arrays.
* containers stacks::           Simple stacks.
* containers queues::           Simple queues.
* containers bitvectors::       Bitvectors.
* containers iterators::        Iterating over sequences.
@end menu

@include nausicaa-containers-lists.texi
@include nausicaa-containers-vectors.texi
@include nausicaa-containers-strings.texi
@include nausicaa-containers-arrays.texi
@include nausicaa-containers-stacks.texi
@include nausicaa-containers-queues.texi
@include nausicaa-containers-bitvectors.texi
@include nausicaa-containers-iterators.texi

@c page
@node uri
@chapter Uniform Resource Identifiers (@uri{})


@menu
* uri ip::            Generic @ip{} addresses.
* uri uri::           Uniform Resource Identifier objects.
* uri pathnames::     File pathnames.
@end menu

@include nausicaa-uri-uri.texi
@include nausicaa-uri-pathnames.texi

@c page
@node parser-tools
@chapter Lexers and parsers


@menu
* parser-tools source-locations::  Representing source locations.
* parser-tools lexical-tokens::    Describing lexical tokens.
* parser-tools lalr::              A LALR(1) parser generator.
* parser-tools ip-addresses::      Lexer and parser for IP addresses.
* parser-tools uri::               Parsing Uniform Resource Identifiers.
* parser-tools unix-pathnames::    Parsing Unix file system pathnames.
@end menu

@include nausicaa-parser-tools-source-locations.texi
@include nausicaa-parser-tools-lexical-tokens.texi
@include nausicaa-parser-tools-lalr.texi
@include nausicaa-parser-tools-ip-addresses.texi
@include nausicaa-parser-tools-uri.texi
@include nausicaa-parser-tools-unix-pathnames.texi

@c page
@node net
@chapter Networking


@c @menu
@c * net addresses::               Network resource addresses.
@c @end menu

@c @include nausicaa-net-addresses.texi

@c page

@include gpl-3.0.texi
@include fdl-1.3.texi

@c page
@node concept index
@appendix An entry for each concept

@printindex cp

@node function index
@appendix An entry for each function.

@printindex fn

@node variable index
@appendix An entry for each variable.

@printindex vr

@node type index
@appendix An entry for each type.

@printindex tp

@contents
@bye

@c end of file

