@node lexical-tokens
@chapter Describing lexical tokens


@cindex @library{nausicaa parser-tools lexical-tokens}, library
@cindex Library @library{nausicaa parser-tools lexical-tokens}


It is an accepted pattern to split the interpretation of a stream of
text into a lexing step and a parsing step.  The lexer fragments the
input into @dfn{tokens} each of which is assigned a @dfn{category}, the
parser associates a semantic meaning to a sequence of token categories.

The library @library{nausicaa parser-tools lexical-tokens} defines the
classes @class{lexical-token} and @class{source-location} which are
meant to be used by all the lexers and parsers distributed with
@value{PACKAGE}.

@menu
* lexical-tokens location::       Source location records.
* lexical-tokens token::          Lexical token records.
@end menu

@c page
@node lexical-tokens location
@section Source location records


Location records are meant to store informations about the position of a
token in the input stream; they should be produced by the lexer and
either discarded or consumed by the parser's error handler.  All the
bindings are exported by the @library{nausicaa parser-tools
lexical-tokens} library; this library is built on top of
@library{nausicaa language classes} and @library{nausicaa language
generics}.

It is cleaner to implement the parser in such a way that location
records are used only by client--supplied error handlers, not by the
parser itself.  The parser should handle the location as an opaque
value, possibly @false{} when there is no consistent way to track the
source location.

@menu
* lexical-tokens location type::    The record type.
* lexical-tokens location makers::  Building records.
* lexical-tokens location pred::    Predicates.
* lexical-tokens location cmp::     Comparison functions.
* lexical-tokens location update::  Updating the location.
* lexical-tokens location misc::    Miscellaneous functions.
@end menu

@c page
@node lexical-tokens location type
@subsection Type, makers, accessors


@deftp Class @aclass{source-location}
References the position of the next character to parse in the input
stream, which is the position of the first char in the next token
produced by the lexer.
@end deftp


@defcv {Immutable Field} @aclass{source-location} input
Describes the source of the input.  It can be any Scheme value, for
example a string representing the pathname of an input file.  Set to
@false{} if the source is unknown.
@end defcv


@deftypecv {Immutable Field} @aclass{source-location} @aclass{integer} line
@deftypecvx {Immutable Field} @aclass{source-location} @aclass{integer} column
@deftypecvx {Immutable Field} @aclass{source-location} @aclass{integer} offset
Counters for the line number, column number and character offset from
the start of the input.  By convention: Line and column numbers start
from @math{1}, the offset starts from @math{0}.

When the value of these counters is not known, by convention, they
should be set to @false{}, so that they are no more numbers.

Notice that these values match the local bindings @samp{yyline},
@samp{yycolumn} and @samp{yyoffset} available to the lexer actions of
the @library{nausicaa silex} library.  @ref{silex semantics action,
Evaluation of the actions}
@end deftypecv

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Procedural interface


@defun <source-location>-input @var{loc}
@defunx <source-location>-line @var{loc}
@defunx <source-location>-column @var{loc}
@defunx <source-location>-offset @var{loc}
Accessors for the fields of a @class{source-location} record.
@end defun

@c page
@node lexical-tokens location makers
@subsection Building records


@defop Syntax @aclass{source-location} make @aclass{source-location} @meta{clause} @dots{}
@defopx Syntax @aclass{source-location} make* @aclass{source-location} @meta{input} @meta{line} @meta{column} @meta{offset}
@defopx {Auxiliary Syntax} @aclass{source-location} input: @meta{input-source}
@defopx {Auxiliary Syntax} @aclass{source-location} line: @meta{line}
@defopx {Auxiliary Syntax} @aclass{source-location} column: @meta{column}
@defopx {Auxiliary Syntax} @aclass{source-location} offset: @meta{offset}
Build and return a new instance of @class{source-location}.
@end defop

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Procedural interface

@defun make-<source-location> @var{input} @var{line} @var{colum} @var{offset}
Build and return a record of type @class{source-location}.
@end defun


@defun make-<source-location>/start @var{input}
Build and return a @class{source-location} record representing the very
beginning of an input stream.  The line and column counters are set to
@math{1}, the offset counter is set to @math{0}; @var{input} is stored
in the @samp{input} field.
@end defun

@c page
@node lexical-tokens location pred
@subsection Predicates


@defop Syntax @aclass{source-location} is-a? @meta{obj} @aclass{source-location}
Return @true{} if @meta{obj} is an instance of @class{source-location}.
@end defop

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Procedural interface

@defun <source-location>? @var{obj}
@defunx <source-location>?/or-false @var{obj}
Return true if @var{obj} is a record of type @class{source-location}.
The second variant accepts @false{}, too.
@end defun


@defun <source-location>?/start @var{obj}
@defunx <source-location>?/start/or-false @var{obj}
Return true if @var{obj} is a record of type @class{source-location} and
it represents the first possible location: Column and line counters set
to @math{1}.  The offset counter is ignored.  The second variant accepts
@false{}, too.
@end defun

@c page
@node lexical-tokens location cmp
@subsection Comparison functions


@defun source-location=? @vari{loc} @varii{loc}
Compare @vari{loc} and @varii{loc} which must be @false{} or records of
type @class{source-location}.  Return true if @vari{loc} and @varii{loc}
are true and the line, column and offset counters have the same values.
@end defun


The following comparison functions establish an ordering in the space of
the @class{source-location} records and @false{} by comparing the line
and column counters.  By convention:

@itemize
@item
A @class{source-location} record is more advanced than @false{} in the
input stream.

@item
When the arguments of a comparision function application are both
@false{}, the result is @false{}.
@end itemize


@defun source-location-point=? @vari{loc} @varii{loc}
Return @true{} if the line and column counters of @vari{loc} and
@varii{loc} have the same values.
@end defun


@defun source-location-point>? @vari{loc} @varii{loc}
Return @true{} if @vari{loc} is more advanced in the input stream than
@varii{loc}.
@end defun


@defun source-location-point>=? @vari{loc} @varii{loc}
Return @true{} if @vari{loc} is more advanced or at the same point, in
the input stream than @varii{loc}.
@end defun


@defun source-location-point<? @vari{loc} @varii{loc}
Return @true{} if @vari{loc} is less advanced in the input stream than
@varii{loc}.
@end defun


@defun source-location-point<=? @vari{loc} @varii{loc}
Return @true{} if @vari{loc} is less advanced or at the same point, in
the input stream than @varii{loc}.
@end defun

@c page
@node lexical-tokens location update
@subsection Updating the location


@defun source-location-update @var{location} @var{char/token-length}
If @var{location} is @false{}, the return value is @false{}.  If
@var{location} is a @class{source-location} record, build and return a
new @class{source-location} record representing the position of the next
char to be parsed in the input stream, starting from @var{location} and
updated with @var{char/token-length}.

@itemize
@item
If @var{char/token-length} is an exact integer, it is interpreted as
token length.  The column and offset counters from @var{location} are
incremented by that amount.

@item
If @var{char/token-length} is the @samp{#\return} character the action
depends upon the value of the @samp{source-location-honor-return}
parameter: if it is true, the column counter is set to @math{1} and the
offset counter is incremented by @math{1}; if it is @false{}, the column
and offset counters are incremented by @math{1}.

@item
If @var{char/token-length} is the @samp{#\newline} character: The line
counter is incremented by @math{1}, the column counter is set to
@math{1} and the offset counter is incremented by @math{1}.

@item
If @var{char/token-length} is the @samp{#\tab} character: The offset
counter is incremented by @math{1} and the column counter is set to the
result of:

@example
((source-location-tab-function)
    (<source-location>-column @var{location}))
@end example

@noindent
that is, the current procedure in the
@samp{source-location-tab-function} parameter is applied to the column
counter to produce the next column counter's value.
@end itemize
@end defun


@deffn Parameter source-location-tab-function
Hold a function used to produce the next column counter's value given
the current column counter.  By default it is set to
@func{source-location-tab-function/8chars}.
@end deffn


@defun source-location-tab-function/8chars @var{column}
Return the smallest multiple of @math{8} which is greater than
@var{column}.
@end defun


@defun source-location-tab-function/tab-table @var{column}
Produce the next column counter's value drawing it from the list of
horizontal tabulation offsets in the @samp{source-location-tab-table}
parameter.  The returned value is the smallest offset which is greater
than @var{column}.  If the list is null or all the offsets are smaller
than @var{column}, @func{source-location-tab-function/8chars} is used to
compute the return value.
@end defun


@deffn Parameter source-location-tab-table
Hold a list of horizontal tabulation offsets, sorted in increasing
order.  The default value is null.
@end deffn


@deffn Parameter source-location-honor-return
Hold a boolean value which causes @func{source-location-update} to honor
a @samp{#\return} character or not.
@end deffn

@c page
@node lexical-tokens location misc
@subsection Miscellaneous functions


The procedures described here make use of the @library{nausicaa language
generics} library; @ref{generics, Multimethod dispatching}.


@defun source-location->string @var{loc}
Return a string representation of @var{loc}, which must be a record of
type @class{source-location} or @false{}.  If @var{loc} is @false{}, the
return value is the string @samp{<??>}; else the result is of the form:

@example
<input>:line:column
@end example

@noindent
for example @samp{main.c:33:7}.  @meta{input} is a string produced by
applying @func{object->string} to the value of the @samp{input} field of
@var{loc}.

Notice that the use of this function is not mandatory at all.
@end defun


@deffn Method object->string (@var{o} <source-location>)
Return a string representation of @var{o}.  It is a wrapper for
@func{source-location->string}.
@end deffn

@c page
@node lexical-tokens token
@section Lexical token records


@menu
* lexical-tokens token intro::  Overview of lexical tokens.
* lexical-tokens token token::  Lexical token class.
* lexical-tokens token error::  Lexical error class.
@end menu

@c page
@node lexical-tokens token intro
@subsection Overview of lexical tokens


Lexical token records are meant to store informations about a token from
the input stream; they should be produced by the lexer and consumed by
the parser.  For example, when the lexer tokenises the number @math{123}
from the string @samp{123}, it can build a record with:

@example
(let ((position ---))
  (make* <lexical-token> 'NUMBER position 123 3))
@end example

@noindent
while when tokenising a string it can do:

@example
(let ((position ---))
  (make* <lexical-token> 'STRING position "some text" 9))
@end example

When the lexer has to signal the end--of--input, it must return a token
with category @samp{*eoi*}, and continue to return it if it is called
again and again; it can do:

@example
(let ((position ---))
  (make* <lexical-token> '*eoi* position (eof-object)))
@end example

When the lexer closure has to signal a lexer error (an invalid character
from the input stream), it must return a token with category
@samp{*lexer-error*}.

@c page
@node lexical-tokens token token
@subsection Lexical token class


The following bindings are exported by the @library{nausicaa
parser-tools lexical-tokens} library; this library is built on top of
@library{nausicaa language classes}.


@deftp Class @aclass{lexical-token}
Hold the informations about a token from the input stream.
@end deftp


@defcv {Immutable Field} @aclass{lexical-token} category
Represents the grammar's terminal symbol to which this token belongs.
Every parser @api{} must provide an interface to specify the list of
allowed terminal symbols.
@end defcv


@defcv {Immutable Field} @aclass{lexical-token} location
Represents the location in the input from which the token was built; it
must be @false{} or an instance of @class{source-location} record.
@end defcv


@defcv {Immutable Field} @aclass{lexical-token} value
Represents the semantic value associated with the token.  It can be any
Scheme value.
@end defcv


@defcv {Immutable Field} @aclass{lexical-token} length
It is meant to be the length of the string which generated the token.
When the token represents the end--of--input, this field can be set to
zero.
@end defcv


@defcv {Immutable Virtual Field} @aclass{lexical-token} end-of-input?
True if the token has category @samp{*eoi*}.
@end defcv


@defcv {Immutable Virtual Field} @aclass{lexical-token} lexer-error?
True if the token has category @samp{*lexer-error*}.
@end defcv


@defcv {Immutable Virtual Field} @aclass{lexical-token} special?
True if the token has category @samp{*eoi*} or @samp{*lexer-error*}.
@end defcv


@defop Syntax @aclass{lexical-token} make* @aclass{lexical-token} @var{category} @var{location} @var{value} @var{length}
Build and return a new record of type @class{lexical-token}.
@end defop


@defop Syntax @aclass{lexical-token} make @aclass{lexical-token} @var{clause} ...
@defopx {Auxiliary Syntax} @aclass{lexical-token} category: @var{category}
@defopx {Auxiliary Syntax} @aclass{lexical-token} location: @var{location}
@defopx {Auxiliary Syntax} @aclass{lexical-token} value: @var{value}
@defopx {Auxiliary Syntax} @aclass{lexical-token} length: @var{length}
Build and return a new record of type @class{lexical-token}.  The
@func{category:} clause is mandatory; @var{location} defaults to
@false{}; @var{value} defaults to @false{}; @var{length} defaults to
zero.
@end defop


@defop Syntax @aclass{lexical-token} is-a? @var{obj} @aclass{lexical-token}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is an instance of @class{lexical-token}.
@end defop

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Traditional records @api{}


@defun make-<lexical-token> @var{category} @var{location} @var{value} @var{length}
Build and return a new record of type @class{lexical-token}.
@end defun


@defun make-<lexical-token>/end-of-input @var{location}
Build and return a new record of type @class{lexical-token} meant to
represent the end--of--input.  The field @samp{category} is set to the
symbol @samp{*eoi*}, the field @samp{value} is set to
@samp{(eof-object)}, the field @samp{length} is set to zero.  The field
@samp{location} is set to @var{location}, which must be a
@class{source-location} record or @false{}.
@end defun


@defun make-<lexical-token>/lexer-error @var{location} @var{value} @var{length}
Build and return a new record of type @class{lexical-token} meant to
represent a lexer error.  The field @samp{category} is set to
@samp{*lexer-error*}, all the other fields are initialised with the
arguments.
@end defun


@defun <lexical-token>? @var{obj}
Return true if @var{obj} is a record of type of @class{lexical-token}.
@end defun


@defun <lexical-token>?/end-of-input @var{obj}
Return true if @var{obj} is an instance of @class{lexical-token} having
category @func{eq?} to the symbol @samp{*eoi*}.
@end defun


@defun <lexical-token>?/lexer-error @var{obj}
Return true if @var{obj} is an instance of @class{lexical-token} having
category @func{eq?} to the symbol @samp{*lexer-error*}.
@end defun


@defun <lexical-token>?/special @var{obj}
Return true if @var{obj} is an instance of @class{lexical-token} having
category @func{eq?} to the symbol @samp{*eoi*} or @samp{*lexer-error*}.
@end defun


@defun <lexical-token>-category @var{tok}
@defunx <lexical-token>-location @var{tok}
@defunx <lexical-token>-value @var{tok}
@defunx <lexical-token>-length @var{tok}
Accessors for the fields of @class{lexical-token} records.
@end defun

@c page
@node lexical-tokens token error
@subsection Lexical error class


The following bindings are exported by the @library{nausicaa
parser-tools lexical-tokens} library; this library is built on top of
@library{nausicaa language classes}.


@deftp Class @aclass{lexer-error}
Hold the informations about a lexer error; it is derived from
@class{lexical-token}.  The value of the @code{category} field is always
@samp{*lexer-error*}.
@end deftp


@defcv {Immutable Field} @aclass{lexer-error} message
A Scheme string describing the error.
@end defcv


@defop Syntax @aclass{lexer-error} make* @aclass{lexer-error} @var{location} @var{value} @var{length} @var{message}
Build and return a new record of type @class{lexer-error}.
@end defop


@defop Syntax @aclass{lexer-error} make @aclass{lexer-error} @var{clause} ...
@defopx {Auxiliary Syntax} @aclass{lexer-error} location: @var{location}
@defopx {Auxiliary Syntax} @aclass{lexer-error} value: @var{value}
@defopx {Auxiliary Syntax} @aclass{lexer-error} length: @var{length}
@defopx {Auxiliary Syntax} @aclass{lexer-error} error-message: @var{message}
Build and return a new record of type @class{lexer-error}.  The
@func{error-message:} clause is mandatory; @var{location} defaults to
@false{}; @var{value} defaults to @false{}; @var{length} defaults to
zero.
@end defop


@defop Syntax @aclass{lexer-error} is-a? @var{obj} @aclass{lexer-error}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is an instance of @class{lexer-error}.
@end defop

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Traditional records @api{}


@defun make-<lexer-error> @var{location} @var{value} @var{length} @var{message}
Build and return a new record of type @class{lexer-error}.
@end defun


@defun <lexer-error>? @var{obj}
Return true if @var{obj} is a record of type of @class{lexer-error}.
@end defun


@defun <lexer-error>-message @var{tok}
Accessor for the field of @class{lexer-error} records.
@end defun

@c end of file
