@node source-locations
@section Representing source locations


The library @library{nausicaa parser-tools source-locations} defines the
class @class{source-location} to represent informations about the
position of a token in a source of characters; they should be produced
by the lexer and either discarded or consumed by the parser's error
handler.

It is cleaner to implement the parser in such a way that location
objects are used only by client--supplied error handlers, not by the
parser itself.  The parser should handle the location as an opaque
value, possibly in ``unspecified'' state when there is no consistent way
to track the source location.

@menu
* source-locations objects::      Source location objects.
* source-locations comparison::   Comparison methods.
* source-locations update::       Updating the location.
* source-locations unspecified::  Unspecified source locations.
* source-locations misc::         Miscellaneous functions.
* source-locations examples::     Some code examples.
@end menu

@c page
@node source-locations objects
@subsection Source location objects


@deftp Class @aclass{source-location}
Represent a source location in a source of characters used as input for
a lexer.  It is meant to reference the position of the next character to
parse from the input, which is the position of the first char in the
next token produced by the lexer.
@end deftp


@defop {Common constructor} @aclass{source-location} constructor @var{specified?} @var{line} @var{column} @var{offset}
Build and return a new @class{source-location} object initialised with
the given field values.
@end defop


@defop {Maker syntax} @aclass{source-location} @aclass{source-location} (@meta{clause} @dots{})
@defopx {Maker syntax} @aclass{source-location} @aclass{source-location} (unspecified)
@defopx {Auxiliary Syntax} @aclass{source-location} line: @meta{line}
@defopx {Auxiliary Syntax} @aclass{source-location} column: @meta{column}
@defopx {Auxiliary Syntax} @aclass{source-location} offset: @meta{offset}
Build and return a new instance of @class{source-location} using the
common constructor and the given arguments.  When a @meta{clause}
argument is not used, its default value is such that the returned object
represents the conventional starting position, with line number
@math{1}, column number @math{1} and offset @math{0}.

When the @code{unspecified} argument is used: it must be an identifier
whose symbol name is @code{unspecified}; the return value is an object
whose @code{specified?} field is set to @false{}.
@end defop


@deftypecv {Immutable field} @aclass{source-location} @aclass{boolean} specified?
@deftypecvx {Immutable virtual field} @aclass{source-location} @aclass{boolean} unspecified?
The field @code{specified?} is @true{} if this object represents a specified
source location; @false{} otherwise.  The field @code{unspecified?} is
@true{} if this object represents an unspecified source location; @false{}
otherwise.
@end deftypecv


@deftypecv {Immutable field} @aclass{source-location} @aclass{positive-fixnum} line
@deftypecvx {Immutable field} @aclass{source-location} @aclass{positive-fixnum} column
@deftypecvx {Immutable field} @aclass{source-location} @aclass{nonnegative-fixnum} offset
Counters for the line number, column number and character offset from
the start of the input.  By convention: line and column numbers start
from @math{1}, the offset starts from @math{0}.  The value of these
fields is meaningful only if the field @code{specified?} is set to
@true{}.

@quotation
These fields are modeled to match the local bindings @samp{yyline},
@samp{yycolumn} and @samp{yyoffset} available to the lexer actions of
SILex; @libsref{silex semantics action, Evaluation of the actions}.
@end quotation
@end deftypecv


@deftypemethod @aclass{source-location} @aclass{boolean} start?
Return @true{} if the instance is specified and represents the
conventional starting position: line number @math{1}, column number
@math{1} and offset @math{0}; otherwise return @false{}.
@end deftypemethod

@c page
@node source-locations comparison
@subsection Comparison methods


@deftypemethod @aclass{source-location} @aclass{boolean} = (@var{L} @aclass{source-location})
Compare the instance object with the given @var{L} object and return
@true{} if they are both specified and have equal @code{offset} field;
otherwise return @false{}.
@end deftypemethod


@deftypemethod @aclass{source-location} @aclass{boolean} < (@var{L} @aclass{source-location})
Compare the instance object with the given @var{L} object and return
@true{} if they are both specified and the instance has @code{offset}
field less than the one of @var{L}; otherwise return @false{}.
@end deftypemethod


@deftypemethod @aclass{source-location} @aclass{boolean} > (@var{L} @aclass{source-location})
Compare the instance object with the given @var{L} object and return
@true{} if they are both specified and the instance has @code{offset}
field greater than the one of @var{L}; otherwise return @false{}.
@end deftypemethod


@deftypemethod @aclass{source-location} @aclass{boolean} <= (@var{L} @aclass{source-location})
Compare the instance object with the given @var{L} object and return
@true{} if they are both specified and the instance has @code{offset}
field less than, or equal to, the one of @var{L}; otherwise return
@false{}.
@end deftypemethod


@deftypemethod @aclass{source-location} @aclass{boolean} >= (@var{L} @aclass{source-location})
Compare the instance object with the given @var{L} object and return
@true{} if they are both specified and the instance has @code{offset}
field greater than, or equal to, the one of @var{L}; otherwise return
@false{}.
@end deftypemethod

@c page
@node source-locations update
@subsection Updating the location


@deftypemethod @aclass{source-location} @aclass{source-location} update (@var{fx} @aclass{nonnegative-fixnum})
@deftypemethodx @aclass{source-location} @aclass{source-location} update (@var{ch} @aclass{char})
If the instance object is unspecified: return a @class{source-location}
object in unspecified state; otherwise build and return a new
@class{source-location} object representing a location past the one of
the instance according to the given arguments.

If the argument is @var{fx}: it is interpreted as token length; the
column and offset counters are incremented by that amount.

If the argument if @var{ch}, the action depends on its specific value;
if it is:

@table @samp
@item #\return
The action depends upon the value of the parameter
@samp{source-location-honor-return}:

@itemize
@item
If it is true: the column counter is set to @math{1} and the offset
counter is incremented by @math{1}.

@item
If it is @false{}: the column and offset counters are incremented by
@math{1}.
@end itemize

@item #\newline
The line counter is incremented by @math{1}, the column counter is set
to @math{1} and the offset counter is incremented by @math{1}.

@item #\tab
The offset counter is incremented by @math{1} and the column counter is
set to the result of:

@example
(let (((L <source-location>) ---))
  ((source-location-tab-function) (L column)))
@end example

@noindent
that is, the current procedure in the parameter
@func{source-location-tab-function} is applied to the column counter to
produce the next column counter's value.
@end table
@end deftypemethod


@deffn Parameter source-location-tab-function
Hold a function used to produce the next column counter's value given
the current column counter.  By default it is set to
@func{source-location-tab-function/8chars}.
@end deffn


@defun source-location-tab-function/8chars @var{column}
Return the smallest multiple of @math{8} which is greater than
@var{column}.
@end defun


@defun source-location-tab-function/tab-table @var{column}
Produce the next column counter's value drawing it from the list of
horizontal tabulation offsets in the @samp{source-location-tab-table}
parameter.  The returned value is the smallest offset which is greater
than @var{column}.  If the list is null or all the offsets are smaller
than @var{column}, @func{source-location-tab-function/8chars} is used to
compute the return value.
@end defun


@deffn Parameter source-location-tab-table
Hold a list of horizontal tabulation offsets, sorted in increasing
order.  The default value is null.
@end deffn


@deffn Parameter source-location-honor-return
Hold a boolean value which causes the @func{update} method to honor a
@samp{#\return} character or not.
@end deffn

@c page
@node source-locations unspecified
@subsection Unspecified source locations


@defun unspecified-source-location
Return a @class{source-location} object representing an unspecified
source location.  This function always returns the same object.
@end defun


@deffn Parameter unspecified-source-location-string
Contains a string representation for @class{source-location} objects
representing an unspecified source location.  It is initialised to
@samp{"no-source"}.
@end deffn

@c page
@node source-locations misc
@subsection Miscellaneous methods and functions


The procedures described here make use of multimethods;
@ref{multimethods, Multimethod dispatching}.


@deftypemethod @aclass{source-location} @aclass{string} string
Return a string representing the instance object.  If the instance
object is specified the string has the format
@samp{@meta{line}:@meta{column}}, where @meta{line} is the line number
and @meta{column} is the column number; otherwise the returned value is
the one referenced by the parameter
@func{unspecified-source-location-string}.
@end deftypemethod


@deffn Method object->string (@var{O} @aclass{source-location})
Return a string representation of @var{O}.  It makes use of the method
@func{string} of @class{source-location}.
@end deffn

@c page
@node source-locations examples
@subsection Some code examples


The following code defines a hashable source location object:

@example
(module (<hashable-source-location>)
  (import (prefix (vicare language-extensions makers) mk.))

  (define-class <hashable-source-location>
    (parent sl.<source-location>)
    (mixins (<hashable-and-properties-clauses>
             (<class>         <hashable-source-location>)))

    (protocol
     (lambda (make-source-location)
       (lambda (specified? line column offset)
         ((make-source-location specified? line column offset)
          #f ;;field from <hashable-and-properties-clauses>
          ))))

    (maker
     (lambda (stx)
       (syntax-case stx ()
         ((_ (?unspecified))
          (and (identifier? #'?unspecified)
               (identifier=symbol? #'?unspecified 'unspecified))
          #'(make-<hashable-source-location> #f 1 1 0))
         ((_ (?expr ...))
          #'(%make-hashable-source-location ?expr ...)))))

    #| end of class |# )

  (mk.define-maker %make-hashable-source-location
      (make-<hashable-source-location> #t)
    ;;These default values represent the start location
    ;;of a source of characters.
    ((sl.line:        1)
     (sl.column:      1)
     (sl.offset:      0)))

  #| end of module |# )
@end example

@c end of file
