@node parser-tools uri
@section Parsing Uniform resource identifiers


@cindex @library{nausicaa parser-tools uri}, library
@cindex Library @library{nausicaa parser-tools uri}


The library @library{nausicaa parser-tools uri} library implements a
parser to handle @uri{}s compliant with @rfc{} 3986:

@center @url{http://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/rfc3986/}

@noindent
for an introduction to @uri{}s see:

@center @url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_Resource_Identifier}

The purpose of @library{nausicaa parser-tools uri} is to validate and
convert a @uri{} representation as string or bytevector into a data
structure in which the components are available as bytevectors; it is
suggested to use the object types defined by the library
@library{nausicaa net addresses uri}.

When importing the library @library{nausicaa parser-tools uri}, it is
suggested to prefix the bindings with @code{uri.}, as in:

@example
(import (nausicaa)
  (prefix (nausicaa parser-tools uri) uri.))
@end example

@menu
* parser-tools uri intro::      Introduction to @uri{} elements.
* parser-tools uri conditions:: Condition object types.
* parser-tools uri percent::    Percent encoding of characters.
* parser-tools uri parser::     @uri{} parser functions.
* parser-tools uri class::      Class interfaces.
* parser-tools uri misc::       Miscellaneous functions.
@end menu

@c page
@node parser-tools uri intro
@subsection Introduction to @uri{} elements


@rfc{} 3986 defines the following @uri{} grammar (from ``Appendix A'');
there are 4 main elements @code{URI}, @code{absolute-URI},
@code{relative-ref}, @code{path}.

An @code{URI} begins with a mandatory @code{scheme} component and has
one of the following path types: @code{path-abempty},
@code{path-absolute}, @code{path-rootless}, @code{path-empty}, with
@code{path-abempty} present only when the @code{authority} is also
present.  An @code{absolute-URI} is just an @code{URI} without
@code{fragment} component.

A @code{relative-ref} begins with no @code{scheme} component and has one
of the following path types: @code{path-abempty}, @code{path-absolute},
@code{path-noscheme}, @code{path-empty}, with @code{path-abempty}
present only when the @code{authority} is also present.  Notice how a
@code{relative-ref} has the @code{path-noscheme} component rather than
the @code{path-rootless} component of the @code{URI}.

@smallexample
URI-reference = URI | relative-ref

URI           = scheme ":" hier-part [ "?" query ] [ "#" fragment ]

relative-ref  = relative-part [ "?" query ] [ "#" fragment ]

absolute-URI  = scheme ":" hier-part [ "?" query ]

hier-part     = "//" authority path-abempty
              | path-absolute
              | path-rootless
              | path-empty

relative-part = "//" authority path-abempty
              | path-absolute
              | path-noscheme
              | path-empty

scheme        = ALPHA *( ALPHA | DIGIT | "+" | "-" | "." )

authority     = [ userinfo "@@" ] host [ ":" port ]
userinfo      = *( unreserved | pct-encoded | sub-delims | ":" )
host          = IP-literal | IPv4address | reg-name
port          = *DIGIT

IP-literal    = "[" ( IPv6address | IPvFuture  ) "]"

IPvFuture     = "v" 1*HEXDIG "." 1*( unreserved | sub-delims | ":" )

IPv6address   =                            6( h16 ":" ) ls32
              |                       "::" 5( h16 ":" ) ls32
              | [               h16 ] "::" 4( h16 ":" ) ls32
              | [ *1( h16 ":" ) h16 ] "::" 3( h16 ":" ) ls32
              | [ *2( h16 ":" ) h16 ] "::" 2( h16 ":" ) ls32
              | [ *3( h16 ":" ) h16 ] "::"    h16 ":"   ls32
              | [ *4( h16 ":" ) h16 ] "::"              ls32
              | [ *5( h16 ":" ) h16 ] "::"              h16
              | [ *6( h16 ":" ) h16 ] "::"

h16           = 1*4HEXDIG
ls32          = ( h16 ":" h16 ) | IPv4address
IPv4address   = dec-octet "." dec-octet "." dec-octet "." dec-octet

dec-octet     = DIGIT                 ; 0-9
              | %x31-39 DIGIT         ; 10-99
              | "1" 2DIGIT            ; 100-199
              | "2" %x30-34 DIGIT     ; 200-249
              | "25" %x30-35          ; 250-255

reg-name      = *( unreserved | pct-encoded | sub-delims )

path          = path-abempty    ; begins with "/" or is empty
              | path-absolute   ; begins with "/" but not "//"
              | path-noscheme   ; begins with a non-colon segment
              | path-rootless   ; begins with a segment
              | path-empty      ; zero characters

path-abempty  = *( "/" segment )
path-absolute = "/" [ segment-nz *( "/" segment ) ]
path-noscheme = segment-nz-nc *( "/" segment )
path-rootless = segment-nz *( "/" segment )
path-empty    = 0<pchar>

segment       = *pchar
segment-nz    = 1*pchar
segment-nz-nc = 1*( unreserved | pct-encoded | sub-delims | "@@" )
              ; non-zero-length segment without any colon ":"

pchar         = unreserved | pct-encoded | sub-delims | ":" | "@@"

query         = *( pchar | "/" | "?" )

fragment      = *( pchar | "/" | "?" )

pct-encoded   = "%" HEXDIG HEXDIG

unreserved    = ALPHA | DIGIT | "-" | "." | "_" | "~"
reserved      = gen-delims | sub-delims
gen-delims    = ":" | "/" | "?" | "#" | "[" | "]" | "@@"
sub-delims    = "!" | "$" | "&" | "'" | "(" | ")"
              | "*" | "+" | "," | ";" | "="
@end smallexample

Here are some notes on producing @uri{} references:

@itemize
@item
Percent--encoded characters should be produced in upper case.

@item
The @code{scheme} component should be produced in lower case.

@item
The @code{host} component is case insensitive (including the @code{v}
starting a @code{ipvfuture}), but should be produced in lower case.

@item
Quoting the @rfc{} regarding @code{host} components:

@quotation
Non--@ascii{} characters must first be encoded according to @utf{}-8,
and then each octet of the corresponding @utf{}8 sequence must be
percent--encoded to be represented as @uri{} characters.  @uri{}
producing applications must not use percent--encoding in @code{host}
unless it is used to represent a @utf{}-8 character sequence.
@end quotation

@item
IPv6 addresses should be produced with hex digits in lower case.
@end itemize

@c page
@node parser-tools uri conditions
@subsection Condition object types


The following bindings are exported by the library @library{nausicaa
parser-tools uri}.


@deftp {Condition Type} &uri-parser-error
Tag a compound condition object as being a @uri{} parser error; it is
derived from @condition{error}.  It has the following fields:

@table @code
@item offset
Zero--based offset of the byte which caused the error from the beginning
of the input.  Whether it is the offset from the beginning of a full
@uri{} or @uri{} reference or other input depends on the function
raising the exception.
@end table

This condition type can be used in Nausicaa's @oopp{} syntaxes.

@example
(import (nausicaa)
  (prefix (nausicaa parser-tools uri) uri.))

(define C
  (uri.&uri-parser-error (10)))

((uri.&uri-parser-error) C)
@result{} #t

(try
    (raise C)
  (catch E
    (uri.&uri-parser-error
     #t)
    (else #f)))
@result{} #t
@end example
@end deftp


@defun raise-uri-parser-error @var{who} @var{message} @var{offset} @var{irritant} @dots{}
Raise a compound condition object with types @condition{who},
@condition{message}, @condition{irritants},
@condition{uri-parser-error}.  The argument @var{offset} is used as
@code{offset} field for @condition{uri-parser-error}.
@end defun

@c page
@node parser-tools uri percent
@subsection Percent encoding of characters


A bytevector, whose bytes are interpreted as @ascii{} characters, is
valid as @uri{} component only if its characters match the following
@library{vicare parser-tools silex} specification (@libsref{silex
syntax, Syntax of the specification}):

@example
ALPHA           [a-zA-Z]
DIGIT           [0-9]
HEXDIG          [0-9a-fA-F]

pct-encoded     %@{HEXDIG@}@{HEXDIG@}

gen-delims      [:/\?#\[\]@@]
sub-delims      [\!\$&\'()\*\+,\;=]

reserved        @{gen-delims@}|@{sub-delims@}
unreserved      @{ALPHA@}|@{DIGIT@}|[\-\._~]
@end example

@noindent
all the characters which are not unreserved are meant to be
percent--encoded in a @uri{} string; in particular the following must be
encoded:

@example
: / ? # [ ] @ \ ! $ & ' ( ) * + , ; =
@end example

@noindent
the characters in the unreserved set can, but should not, be encoded.

The following bindings are exported by the library @library{nausicaa
parser-tools uri}.


@defun unreserved-char? @var{obj}
@defunx not-unreserved-char? @var{obj}
The argument @var{obj} must be a character or fixnum representing a
character according to @func{char->integer}.  @func{unreserved-char?}
returns @true{} if @var{obj} represents an unreserved character
according to @rfc{} 3986, otherwise return @false{}.
@func{not-unreserved-char?} returns the negation of
@func{unreserved-char?}.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax percent-encode @meta{obj} @meta{clause} @dots{}
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} char-selector @meta{pred}
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} string-result? @meta{bool}
Percent--encode the given object, return the result; characters outside
a selected range are percent--encoded.

@meta{obj} must be an expression evaluating to any character, string or
bytevector; the character is converted to a string and the string is
converted to a bytevector with @func{string->utf8}.

The following clauses are supported:

@table @code
@item char-selector @meta{pred}
@meta{pred} must be an expression evaluating to a predicate function
which, applied to an integer representing a character according to
@func{char->integer}, returns true if the character must be percent
encoded, @false{} otherwise.  The default is to encode all the not
unreserved characters.

@item string-result? @meta{bool}
If @meta{bool} evaluates to is true: return a string, else return a
bytevector; the default is to return a bytevector.
@end table

Examples:

@example
(import (nausicaa)
  (prefix (nausicaa parser-tools uri) uri.))

(uri.percent-encode #\.)        @result{} "."
(uri.percent-encode #\-)        @result{} "-"
(uri.percent-encode #\_)        @result{} "_"
(uri.percent-encode #\~)        @result{} "~"
(uri.percent-encode #\%)        @result{} "%25"
(uri.percent-encode #\?)        @result{} "%3F"
(uri.percent-encode #\=)        @result{} "%3D"
(uri.percent-encode #\#)        @result{} "%23"

(uri.percent-encode "")         @result{} ""
(uri.percent-encode "ciao")     @result{} "ciao"
(uri.percent-encode "cia=o")    @result{} "cia%3Do"
(uri.percent-encode "ci?a=o")   @result{} "ci%3Fa%3Do"
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax percent-decode @meta{obj} @meta{clause} @dots{}
@deffnx {Auxiliary Syntax} string-result? @meta{bool}
Percent--decode the given @meta{obj}, return the result.

@meta{obj} must be an expression evaluating to any string or bytevector;
the string is converted to a bytevector with @func{string->utf8}.

The following clauses are supported:

@table @code
@item string-result? @meta{bool}
If @meta{bool} evaluates to true: return a string, else return a
bytevector; the default is to return a bytevector.
@end table

Examples:

@example
(import (nausicaa)
  (prefix (nausicaa parser-tools uri) uri.))

(define (doit obj)
  (uri.percent-decode obj (uri.string-result? #t)))

(doit ".")      @result{} "."
(doit "-")      @result{} "-"
(doit "_")      @result{} "_"
(doit "~")      @result{} "~"
(doit "%25")    @result{} "%"
(doit "%3F")    @result{} "?"
(doit "%3D")    @result{} "="
(doit "%23")    @result{} "#"

(doit "")               @result{} ""
(doit "ciao")           @result{} "ciao"
(doit "cia%3Do")        @result{} "cia=o"
(doit "ci%3Fa%3Do")     @result{} "ci?a=o"
@end example
@end deffn


@defun normalise-percent-encoded-bytevector @var{bv}
Normalise the given percent--encoded bytevector; bytes that are encoded
but should not are decoded; return the normalised bytevector, in which
percent--encoded characters are displayed in upper case.  Assume that
@var{bv} is composed by bytes in the valid range for @uri{}s.

Notice that this function does @strong{not} percent--encode bytes which
are already not so.
@end defun


@defun normalise-percent-encoded-string @var{str}
Normalise the given percent--encoded string; characters that are encoded
but should not are decoded; return the normalised string, in which
percent--encoded characters are displayed in upper case.  Assume that
@var{str} is composed by characters in the valid range for @uri{}s.

Notice that this function does @strong{not} percent--encode characters
which are already not so.

@example
(import (nausicaa)
  (prefix (nausicaa parser-tools uri) uri.))

(uri.normalise-percent-encoded-string "ci%3Fa%3Do")
@result{} "ci%3Fa%3Do"

(uri.normalise-percent-encoded-string "%7Eciao")
@result{} "~ciao"

(uri.normalise-percent-encoded-string "ci%5Fao")
@result{} "ci_ao"
@end example
@end defun

@c page
@node parser-tools uri parser
@subsection @uri{} parser functions


All the parser functions attempt to read a @uri{} component from a
binary input port; all of them follow this protocol:

@itemize
@item
If the result of the read operations matches the desired component or
components: a possibly empty bytevector or a possibly empty list of
bytevectors is returned; the operation is successful.  The port position
is left referencing the first byte after the component.

@item
If the result of the read operations does not match the desired
component: the return value is the boolean false.  The port position is
left unchanged.

@item
If an invalid input is read, for example an incomplete percent--encoded
sequence, an exception is raised with compound condition object of type
@condition{&uri-parser-error}.  The port position is left unchanged.
@end itemize

@menu
* parser-tools uri parser basic::     Basic component parser functions.
* parser-tools uri parser authority:: Authority components parser functions.
* parser-tools uri parser segment::   Path segment component parser
                                      functions.
* parser-tools uri parser path::      Path component parser functions.
* parser-tools uri parser main::      Main components parser functions.
* parser-tools uri parser misc::      Miscellaneous parser functions.
@end menu

@c page
@node parser-tools uri parser basic
@subsubsection Basic component parser functions


The following functions will parse the elements of a @uri{}; all of them
accept a @var{port} argument: it must be a binary input port supporting
the port position.  The following bindings are exported by the library
@library{nausicaa parser-tools uri}.


@defun parse-scheme @var{port}
Accumulate bytes from @var{port} while they are valid for the
@code{scheme} component.  If a colon is found: return a bytevector
holding the accumulated bytes, colon excluded; else return @false{}.

When successful: leave the port position referencing the byte after the
one representing the colon; if an error occurs: rewind the port position
to the one before this function call.

@example
(import (vicare)
  (prefix (nausicaa parser-tools uri) uri.))

(define (mkport S)
  (open-bytevector-input-port (string->ascii S)))

(define (doit S)
  (cond ((uri.parse-scheme (mkport S))
         => ascii->string)
        (else #f)))

(doit "")               @result{} #f
(doit "hello")          @result{} #f
(doit "hel/lo:")        @result{} #f

(let ((P (mkport "http://ciao")))
  (ascii->string (uri.parse-scheme P))      @result{} "http"
  (ascii->string (get-bytevector-some P)))  @result{} "//ciao"

(let ((P (mkport "A123+-.://ciao")))
  (ascii->string (uri.parse-scheme P))      @result{} "A123+-."
  (ascii->string (get-bytevector-some P)))  @result{} "//ciao"
@end example
@end defun


@defun collect-hier-part @var{port}
@defunx collect-relative-part @var{port}
Accumulate bytes from @var{port} while they are acceptable for a
@code{hier-part} component.  When @eof{} or a question mark or a
number--sign is found: return a bytevector holding the accumulated
bytes, question mark or number--sign excluded; leave the port position
to the byte after the last byte of the @code{hier-part}.  An empty
@code{hier-part} is not accepted: if the first value from the port is
@eof{}, a question mark or a number--sign the return value is @false{};
in this case the port position is left unchanged.

No validation is performed on the returned bytevector.

@example
(import (vicare)
  (prefix (nausicaa parser-tools uri) uri.))

(define (mkport S)
  (open-bytevector-input-port (string->ascii S)))

(define (HP0 S)
  (let* ((P (mkport S))
         (R (uri.collect-hier-part P))
         (Q (ascii->string (get-bytevector-some P))))
    (values R Q)))

(define (HP1 S)
  (let* ((P (mkport S))
         (R (ascii->string (uri.collect-hier-part P)))
         (E (eof-object? (lookahead-u8 P))))
    (values R E)))

(define (HP2 S)
  (let* ((P (mkport S))
         (R (ascii->string (uri.collect-hier-part P)))
         (Q (ascii->string (get-bytevector-some P))))
    (values R Q)))

(uri.collect-hier-part (mkport ""))    @result{} #f

(HP1 "//")             @result{} "//" #t
(HP1 "//ciao")         @result{} "//ciao" #t
(HP1 "//ciao/salut")   @result{} "//ciao/salut" #t

(HP1 "/")              @result{} "/" #t
(HP1 "/ciao")          @result{} "/ciao" #t
(HP1 "/ciao/salut")    @result{} "/ciao/salut" #t

(HP1 ".")              @result{} "." #t
(HP1 "ciao")          @result{} "ciao" #t
(HP1 "ciao/salut")    @result{} "ciao/salut" #t

;; query
(HP0 "?query")
@result{} #f "?query"

(HP2 "//?query")
@result{} "//" "?query"

(HP2 "//ciao?query")
@result{} "//ciao" "?query"

(HP2 "//ciao/salut?query")
@result{} "//ciao/salut" "?query"

(HP2 "/?query")
@result{} "/" "?query"

(HP2 "/ciao?query")
@result{} "/ciao" "?query"

(HP2 "/ciao/salut?query")
@result{} "/ciao/salut" "?query"

(HP2 "./?query")
@result{} "." "?query"

(HP2 "ciao?query")
@result{} "ciao" "?query"

(HP2 "ciao/salut?query")
@result{} "ciao/salut" "?query"

;; fragment
(HP0 "#fragment")
@result{} #f "#fragment"

(HP2 "//#fragment")
@result{} "//" "#fragment"

(HP2 "//ciao#fragment")
@result{} "//ciao" "#fragment"

(HP2 "//ciao/salut#fragment")
@result{} "//ciao/salut" "#fragment"

(HP2 "/#fragment")
@result{} "/" "#fragment"

(HP2 "/ciao#fragment")
@result{} "/ciao" "#fragment"

(HP2 "/ciao/salut#fragment")
@result{} "/ciao/salut" "#fragment"

(HP2 ".#fragment")
@result{} "." "#fragment"

(HP2 "ciao#fragment")
@result{} "ciao" "#fragment"

(HP2 "ciao/salut#fragment")
@result{} "ciao/salut" "#fragment"
@end example
@end defun


@defun parse-query @var{port}
Accumulate bytes from @var{port} while they are valid for a @code{query}
@uri{} component; the first byte read from @var{port} must be a question
mark.  If, after the question mark and possibly other bytes, @eof{} or a
number--sign (@samp{#}) is read: return a bytevector holding the
accumulated bytes, starting question mark excluded and ending
number--sign excluded.  If @eof{} is read first or a byte different from
a question mark is read first: return @false{}.

If successful: leave the port position to the byte after the last byte
of the @code{query} component; if an error occurs: rewind the port
position to the one before this function call.

Notice that an empty @code{query} component is valid (a question mark
followed by @eof{}).

@example
#!vicare
(import (vicare)
  (prefix (nausicaa parser-tools uri) uri.))

(define (mkport S)
  (open-bytevector-input-port (string->ascii S)))

(uri.parse-query (mkport ""))           @result{} #f
(uri.parse-query (mkport "hello"))      @result{} #f
(uri.parse-query (mkport "#hello"))     @result{} #f

(ascii->string
 (uri.parse-query (mkport "?")))
@result{} ""

(ascii->string
 (uri.parse-query (mkport "?the-query???")))
@result{} "the-query???"

(let ((P (mkport "?ciao%3dciao#fragment")))
  (ascii->string (uri.parse-query P))       @result{} "ciao%3dciao"
  (ascii->string (get-bytevector-some P)))  @result{} "#fragment"
@end example
@end defun


@defun parse-fragment @var{port}
Accumulate bytes from @var{port} while they are valid for a
@code{fragment} component; the first byte read from @var{port} must be a
number--sign.  If, after the number--sign and possibly other bytes are
read, @eof{} is read: return a bytevector holding the accumulated bytes,
starting number--sign excluded.  If the first byte is not a number--sign
or @eof{} is read first: return @false{}.

If successful: leave the port position to the byte after the last byte
of the @code{fragment} component; if an error occurs: rewind the port
position to the one before this function call.

Notice that an empty @code{fragment} component is valid (a number--sign
followed by @eof{}).

@example
(import (vicare)
  (prefix (nausicaa parser-tools uri) uri.))

(define (mkport S)
  (open-bytevector-input-port (string->ascii S)))

(uri.parse-fragment (mkport ""))         @result{} #f
(uri.parse-fragment (mkport "#hello#"))  @result{} #f
(uri.parse-fragment (mkport "hello"))    @result{} #f
(uri.parse-fragment (mkport "?hello"))   @result{} #f

(ascii->string
 (uri.parse-fragment (mkport "#")))
@result{} ""

(ascii->string
 (uri.parse-fragment (mkport "#fragment???")))
@result{} "fragment???"

(ascii->string
 (uri.parse-fragment (mkport "#ciao%3dciao")))
@result{} "ciao%3dciao"
@end example
@end defun

@c page
@node parser-tools uri parser authority
@subsubsection Authority components parser functions


The following functions can be used to parse the elements of a @uri{};
all the functions accept a @var{port} argument: it must be a binary
input port.  When parsing an @code{authority} component: we are meant to
extract the full @code{authority} component from a @uri{} and then parse
it separately.

The following bindings are exported by the @library{nausicaa
parser-tools uri} library.


@defun parse-authority @var{port}
Accumulate bytes from @var{port} while they are valid for an
@code{authority} component in the @code{hier-part} of a @uri{} or the
@code{relative-part} of a @code{relative-ref}.  The first two bytes read
must represent, in @ascii{} encoding, two slash characters; after the
two slashes, if @eof{} or a byte representing a slash, a question mark
or a number--sign is read: return a bytevector holding the accumulated
bytes, ending slash, question mark or number--sign excluded; else return
@false{}.

If successful: leave the port position to the byte after the last
accumulated byte; if an error occurs: rewind the port position to the
one before this function call.

Notice that an empty @code{authority} (after the two leading slashes) is
valid: it is the case of @code{authority} equal to a @code{host}
component, equal to a @code{reg-name} component which can be empty.

@example
(import (vicare)
  (prefix (nausicaa parser-tools uri) uri.))

(define (mkport S)
  (open-bytevector-input-port (string->ascii S)))

(define (f0 str)
  (uri.parse-authority (mkport str)))

(define (f1 str)
  (let* ((P (mkport str))
         (R (ascii->string (uri.parse-authority P)))
         (E (eof-object? (lookahead-u8 P))))
    (values R E)))

(define (f2 str)
  (let* ((P (mkport str))
         (R (ascii->string (uri.parse-authority P)))
         (Q (ascii->string (get-bytevector-all P))))
    (values R Q)))

(f0 "")         @result{} #f
(f0 "ciao")     @result{} #f
(f0 "/ciao")    @result{} #f
(f0 "?ciao")    @result{} #f
(f0 "#ciao")    @result{} #f

(f1 "//")       @result{} "" #t
(f1 "///")      @result{} "" "/"

(f2 "//?query")                 @result{} "" "?query"
(f2 "//#fragment")              @result{} "" "#fragment"
(f2 "///ciao")                  @result{} "" "/ciao"
(f2 "//ciao:8080/salut")        @result{} "ciao:8080" "/salut"
(f2 "//ciao.it:8080/salut")     @result{} "ciao.it:8080" "/salut"
(f2 "//marco@@ciao:8080/salut")  @result{} "marco@@ciao:8080" "/salut"
@end example
@end defun


@defun parse-userinfo @var{port}
Accumulate bytes from @var{port} while they are valid for a
@code{userinfo} component in the @code{authority} component.  If a byte
representing a commercial at--sign (@samp{@@}), in @ascii{} encoding, is
read: return a bytevector holding the accumulated bytes, ending at--sign
excluded; else return @false{}.

If successful: leave the port position to the byte after the ending
at--sign; if an error occurs: rewind the port position to the one before
this function call.

Notice that an empty @code{userinfo} component is valid (an at--sign
preceded by nothing).

@example
(import (vicare)
  (prefix (nausicaa parser-tools uri) uri.))

(define (mkport S)
  (open-bytevector-input-port (string->ascii S)))

(define (f0 str)
  (uri.parse-userinfo (mkport str)))

(define (f00 str)
  (let* ((P (mkport str))
         (R (uri.parse-userinfo P))
         (Q (ascii->string (get-bytevector-all P))))
    (values R Q)))

(define (f1 str)
  (let* ((P (mkport str))
         (R (ascii->string (uri.parse-userinfo P)))
         (E (eof-object? (lookahead-u8 P))))
    (values R E)))

(define (f2 str)
  (let* ((P (mkport str))
         (R (ascii->string (uri.parse-userinfo P)))
         (Q (ascii->string (get-bytevector-all P))))
    (values R Q)))

(f0 "")                 @result{} #f
(f00 "ciao.it")         @result{} #f "ciao.it"
(f00 ":8080")           @result{} #f ":8080"
(f00 "/hello")          @result{} #f "/hello"
(f00 "?hello")          @result{} #f "?hello"
(f00 "#hello")          @result{} #f "#hello"

(f1 "@@")               @result{} "" #t

(f2 "@@host")           @result{} "" "host"
(f2 "userinfo@@host")   @result{} "userinfo" "host"
(f2 "ciao%3dciao@@host")@result{} "ciao%3dciao" "host"
@end example
@end defun


@defun parse-ipv4-address @var{port}
Accumulate bytes from @var{port} while they are valid for an
@code{IPv4address} component, then parse them as IPv4 address.  If
successful return two values: a bytevector holding the accumulated
bytes, a list holding the @math{4} octets as exact integers; else return
@false{} and @false{}.

If successful: leave the port position to the byte after the last one
read from the port; if an error occurs: rewind the port position to the
one before this function call.

No validation is performed on the first byte after the address, if any.

@example
(import (vicare)
  (prefix (nausicaa parser-tools uri) uri.))

(define (mkport S)
  (open-bytevector-input-port (string->ascii S)))

(define (f0 str)
  (uri.parse-ipv4-address (mkport str)))

(define (f00 str)
  (let* ((P (mkport str))
         (R (values->list (uri.parse-ipv4-address P)))
         (Q (ascii->string (get-bytevector-all P))))
    (values R Q)))

(define (f1 str)
  (let* ((P (mkport str))
         (R (receive (addr numbers)
                (uri.parse-ipv4-address P)
              (list (ascii->string addr) numbers)))
         (E (eof-object? (lookahead-u8 P))))
    (values R E)))

(define (f2 str)
  (let* ((P (mkport str))
         (R (receive (addr numbers)
                (uri.parse-ipv4-address P)
              (list (ascii->string addr) numbers)))
         (Q (ascii->string (get-bytevector-all P))))
    (values R Q)))

(f0 "")                 @result{} #f #f

(f00 "ciao")            @result{} (#f #f) "ciao"
(f00 "1.")              @result{} (#f #f) "1."
(f00 "1.2")             @result{} (#f #f) "1.2"
(f00 "1.2.3")           @result{} (#f #f) "1.2.3"
(f00 "1.2.3.4.5")       @result{} (#f #f) "1.2.3.4.5"
(f00 "123ciao")         @result{} (#f #f) "123ciao"
(f00 "1.2.3.ciao")      @result{} (#f #f) "1.2.3.ciao"
(f00 "1.2.3.4.")        @result{} (#f #f) "1.2.3.4."
;;number out of range
(f00 "191.223.376.434") @result{} (#f #f) "191.223.376.434"

(f1 "1.2.3.4")          @result{} ("1.2.3.4" (1 2 3 4)) #t
(f1 "191.223.76.255")   @result{} ("191.223.76.255" (191 223 76 255)) #t

(f2 "1.2.3.4/5")        @result{} ("1.2.3.4" (1 2 3 4)) "/5"
(f2 "1.2.3.4/ciao")     @result{} ("1.2.3.4" (1 2 3 4)) "/ciao"
(f2 "1.2.3.4:8080")     @result{} ("1.2.3.4" (1 2 3 4)) ":8080"
(f2 "1.2.3.4ciao")      @result{} ("1.2.3.4" (1 2 3 4)) "ciao"
@end example
@end defun


@defun parse-ipv6-address @var{port}
Accumulate bytes from @var{port} while they are valid for an
@code{IPv6address} component, then parse them as IPv6 address.  If
successful return two values: a bytevector holding the accumulated
bytes, a list holding the 8 numeric address components as 16-bit exact
integers; else return @false{} and @false{}.

If successful: leave the port position to the byte after the last one
read from the port; if an error occurs: rewind the port position to the
one before this function call.

No validation is performed on the first byte after the address, if any.

@example
(import (vicare)
  (prefix (nausicaa parser-tools uri) uri.))

(define (mkport S)
  (open-bytevector-input-port (string->ascii S)))

(define (f0 str)
  (values->list (uri.parse-ipv6-address (mkport str))))

(define (f00 str)
  (let* ((P (mkport str))
         (R (values->list (uri.parse-ipv6-address P)))
         (Q (ascii->string (get-bytevector-all P))))
    (list R Q)))

(define (f1 str)
  (let*-values
      (((P) (mkport str))
       ((addr numbers)
        (receive (addr numbers)
            (uri.parse-ipv6-address P)
          (values (ascii->string addr) numbers)))
       ((E) (eof-object? (lookahead-u8 P))))
    (list addr numbers E)))

(define (f2 str)
  (let*-values
      (((P) (mkport str))
       ((addr numbers)
        (receive (addr numbers)
            (uri.parse-ipv6-address P)
          (values (ascii->string addr) numbers)))
       ((Q) (ascii->string (get-bytevector-all P))))
    (list addr numbers Q)))

(f0 "")                 @result{} #f #f
(f00 "ciao")            @result{} (#f #f) "ciao"
(f00 "1.2.3.ciao")      @result{} (#f #f) "1.2.3.ciao"

(f1 "1:2:3:4:5:6:7:8")
@result{} "1:2:3:4:5:6:7:8" (1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8) #t

(f1 "::1")
@result{} "::1" (0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1) #t

(f1 "1::")
@result{} "1::" (1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0) #t

(f1 "1:2::3")
@result{} "1:2::3" (1 2 0 0 0 0 0 3) #t

(f1 "1:2:3:4::172.30.67.254")
@result{} "1:2:3:4::172.30.67.254" (1 2 3 4 0 0 #xac1e #x43fe) #t

(f1 "::ffff:192.168.99.1")
@result{} "::ffff:192.168.99.1" (0 0 0 0 0 #xFFFF #xC0A8 #x6301) #t

(f2 "::1/60")
@result{} "::1" (0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1) "/60"
@end example
@end defun


@defun parse-ip-literal @var{port}
Accumulate bytes from @var{port} while they are valid for an
@code{IP-literal} component in a @code{host} component.  The first byte
must represent an open bracket (@samp{[}) character in @ascii{}
encoding; if a byte representing a closed bracket (@samp{]}) is read:
return a bytevector holding the accumulated bytes, brackets excluded;
else return @false{}.

If successful: leave the port position to the byte after the closing
bracket; if an error occurs: rewind the port position to the one before
this function call.

No validation is performed on the returned bytevector contents; the
returned bytevector can be empty even though an @code{IP-literal}
component cannot be of zero length inside the brackets: it is
responsibility of the caller to check the length of the returned
bytevector.

@example
(import (vicare)
  (prefix (nausicaa parser-tools uri) uri.))

(define (mkport S)
  (open-bytevector-input-port (string->ascii S)))

(uri.parse-ip-literal (mkport ""))
@result{} #f

(let ((P (mkport "ciao")))
  (uri.parse-ip-literal P)                  @result{} #f
  (ascii->string (get-bytevector-some P)))  @result{} "ciao"

(ascii->string
 (uri.parse-ip-literal (mkport "[]")))
@result{} ""

(ascii->string
 (uri.parse-ip-literal (mkport "[::0:1:2]")))
@result{} "::0:1:2"

(let ((P (mkport "[::0:1:2]:8080")))
  (ascii->string (uri.parse-ip-literal P))  @result{} "::0:1:2"
  (ascii->string (get-bytevector-some P)))  @result{} ":8080"
@end example
@end defun


@defun parse-ipvfuture @var{port}
Accumulate bytes from @var{port} while they are valid for an
@code{IPvFuture} component in the @code{IP-literal} component.  The
first byte must represent the character @code{v} in @ascii{} encoding
and the second byte must represent a single hexadecimal digit in
@ascii{} encoding; after the prolog is read, bytes are accumulated until
@eof{} is found.

Return two values: an exact integer representing the hexadecimal digit
in @ascii{} encoding, a bytevector holding the accumulated bytes; else
return @false{} and @false{}.

If an error occurs: rewind the port position to the one before this
function call.

No validation is performed on the returned bytevector contents; the
returned bytevector can be empty even though an @code{IPvFuture}
component cannot be of zero length inside the brackets.

@example
(import (vicare)
  (prefix (nausicaa parser-tools uri) uri.))

(define (mkport S)
  (open-bytevector-input-port (string->ascii S)))

(define (f0 str)
  (values->list (uri.parse-ipvfuture (mkport str))))

(define (f1 str)
  (values->list (uri.parse-ipvfuture (mkport str))))

(define (f2 str)
  (receive (version data)
      (uri.parse-ipvfuture (mkport str))
    (list version (ascii->string data))))

(f0 "")                @result{} #f #f
(f0 "ciao")            @result{} #f #f

(f1 "v1")              @result{} 1 #vu8()

(f2 "v9ciao")          @result{} 9 "ciao"
(f2 "vFciao")          @result{} 15 "ciao"
(f2 "VEciao")          @result{} 14 "ciao"
@end example
@end defun


@defun parse-reg-name @var{port}
Accumulate bytes from @var{port} while they are valid for a
@code{reg-name} (registered name) component in a @code{host} component.
If @eof{} or a byte representing a colon, slash, question mark or
number--sign, in @ascii{} encoding, is read: return a bytevector holding
the accumulated bytes, ending byte excluded; else return @false{}.

If successful: leave the port position to the byte after the last one
read from the port, ending colon or slash excluded; if an error occurs:
rewind the port position to the one before this function call.

Notice that an empty @code{reg-name} component is valid; also, a
@code{reg-name} cannot be longer than @math{255} bytes: if it is, this
function returns @false{}.

@example
(import (vicare)
  (prefix (nausicaa parser-tools uri) uri.))

(define (mkport S)
  (open-bytevector-input-port (string->ascii S)))

(define (f0 str)
  (uri.parse-reg-name (mkport str)))

(define (f1 str)
  (let* ((P (mkport str))
         (R (ascii->string (uri.parse-reg-name P)))
         (E (eof-object? (lookahead-u8 P))))
    (list R E)))

(define (f2 str)
  (let* ((P (mkport str))
         (R (ascii->string (uri.parse-reg-name P)))
         (Q (ascii->string (get-bytevector-all P))))
    (list R Q)))

;;no more than 256 chars
(f0 (make-string 256 #\a))     @result{} #f


(f1 "")                        @result{} "" #t
(f1 "the-reg-name")            @result{} "the-reg-name" #t
(f1 "the.reg.name")            @result{} "the.reg.name" #t
(f1 "ciao%3dciao")             @result{} "ciao%3dciao" #t

(f2 ":80")                     @result{} "" ":80"
(f2 "/ciao")                   @result{} "" "/ciao"
(f2 "?query")                  @result{} "" "?query"
(f2 "#fragment")               @result{} "" "#fragment"
(f2 "the-reg-name:80")         @result{} "the-reg-name" ":80"
(f2 "the-reg-name/ciao")       @result{} "the-reg-name" "/ciao"
@end example
@end defun


@defun parse-host @var{port}
Accumulate bytes from @var{port} while they are valid for a @code{host}
component; parse the accumulated bytes as @code{host} and return two
values, the first being one of the Scheme symbols: @code{ipv4-address},
@code{ipv6-address}, @code{ipvfuture}, @code{reg-name}.

The second returned value depends upon the first:

@table @code
@item ipv4-address
The second value is a pair, whose car is a bytevector holding the
accumulated bytes and whose cdr is a list of 4 exact integers
representing the octets.

@item ipv6-address
The second value is a pair, whose car is a bytevector holding the
accumulated bytes (without the enclosing square brackets) and whose cdr
is a list of 8 exact integers representing the address components.

@item ipvfuture
The second value is a pair, whose car is the version number as exact
integer in the range @math{[0, 15]} and whose cdr is a possibly empty
bytevector holding the accumulated bytes (without the enclosing square
brackets, the @code{v} and the version byte).

@item reg-name
The second value is a possibly empty bytevector holding the accumulated
bytes.
@end table

If successful: leave the port position to the byte after the last one
read from the port; if an error occurs: return @false{} and @false{},
rewind the port position to the one before this function call.

@example
(import (vicare)
  (prefix (nausicaa parser-tools uri) uri.))

(define (mkport S)
  (open-bytevector-input-port (string->ascii S)))

(let ((P (mkport "/")))
  (uri.parse-host P)            @result{} reg-name #vu8()
  (ascii->string
   (get-bytevector-some P)))    @result{} "/"

(let ((P (mkport ":80")))
  (uri.parse-host P)            @result{} reg-name #vu8()
  (ascii->string
   (get-bytevector-some P)))    @result{} ":80"

(let ((P (mkport "1.2.3.4:80")))
  (receive (kind data)
      (uri.parse-host P)
    kind                        @result{} ipv4-address
    (ascii->string (car data))  @result{} "1.2.3.4"
    (cdr data))                 @result{} (1 2 3 4)
  (ascii->string
   (get-bytevector-some P)))    @result{} ":80"

(let ((P (mkport "[::ffff:192.168.99.1]:80")))
  (receive (kind data)
      (uri.parse-host P)
    kind                        @result{} ipv6-address
    (ascii->string (car data))  @result{} "::ffff:192.168.99.1"
    (cdr data))                 @result{} (0 0 0 0 0 #xFFFF #xC0A8 #x6301)
  (ascii->string
   (get-bytevector-some P)))    @result{} ":80"

(let ((P (mkport "[vF,ciao,ciao]/ciao")))
  (receive (kind data)
      (uri.parse-host P)
    kind                        @result{} ipvfuture
    (car data)                  @result{} 15
    (ascii->string (cdr data))) @result{} ",ciao,ciao"
  (ascii->string
   (get-bytevector-some P)))    @result{} "/ciao"
@end example
@end defun


@defun parse-port @var{port}
Accumulate bytes from @var{port} while they are valid for a @code{port}
component in the @code{authority} component.  The first byte must
represent a colon in @ascii{} encoding; after that: if @eof{} or a byte
not representing a decimal digit, in @ascii{} encoding, is read: return
a bytevector holding the accumulated bytes, starting colon excluded;
else return @false{}.

If successful: leave the port position to the byte after the last one
read from the port; if an error occurs: rewind the port position to the
one before this function call.

Notice that an empty @code{port} component after the mandatory colon is
valid: in this case an empty bytevector is returned.

@example
(import (vicare)
  (prefix (nausicaa parser-tools uri) uri.))

(define (mkport S)
  (open-bytevector-input-port (string->ascii S)))

(define (f1 str)
  (let* ((P (mkport str))
         (R (ascii->string (uri.parse-port P)))
         (E (eof-object? (lookahead-u8 P))))
    (values R E)))

(uri.parse-port (mkport ""))         @result{} #f

(f1 ":")                @result{} "" #t
(f1 ":2")               @result{} "2" #t
(f1 ":8080")            @result{} "8080" #t

(let ((P (mkport ":8080ciao")))
  (ascii->string (uri.parse-port P))        @result{} "8080"
  (ascii->string (get-bytevector-some P)))  @result{} "ciao"
@end example
@end defun

@c page
@node parser-tools uri parser segment
@subsubsection Path segment component parser functions


The following functions can be used to parse the @code{segment},
@code{segment-nz} and @code{segment-nz-nc} components of a @uri{}; the
relevant portion of the grammar is:

@example
segment       = *pchar
segment-nz    = 1*pchar
segment-nz-nc = 1*( unreserved | pct-encoded | sub-delims | "@@" )

pchar         = unreserved | pct-encoded | sub-delims | ":" | "@@"

unreserved    = ALPHA | DIGIT | "-" | "." | "_" | "~"
pct-encoded   = "%" HEXDIG HEXDIG
sub-delims    = "!" | "$" | "&" | "'" | "(" | ")"
              | "*" | "+" | "," | ";" | "="
@end example

The following bindings are exported by the library @library{nausicaa
parser-tools uri}.  All the functions accept a @var{port} argument: it
must be a binary input port supporting the port position.


@defun parse-segment @var{port}
Accumulate bytes from @var{port} while they are valid for a
@code{segment} component; notice that an empty @code{segment} is valid.

If @eof{} or a byte not valid for a @code{segment} is read: return a
bytevector holding the bytes accumulated so far, invalid byte excluded;
the port position is left pointing to the byte after the last
accumulated one.

If an invalid percent--encoded sequence is read, an exception is raised
with type @condition{uri-parser-error}; the port position is rewind to
the one before this function call.
@end defun


@defun parse-segment-nz @var{port}
Accumulate bytes from @var{port} while they are valid for a
@code{segment-nz} component; notice that an empty @code{segment-nz} is
@strong{not} valid: @code{nz} stands for ``non--zero''.

If the first read operation returns @eof{} or an invalid byte: the port
position is restored to the one before this function call and the return
value is false.

If, after at least one valid byte is read, @eof{} or an invalid byte is
read: return a bytevector holding the bytes accumulated so far, invalid
byte excluded; the port position is left pointing to the byte after the
last accumulated one.

If an invalid percent--encoded sequence is read, an exception is raised
with type @condition{uri-parser-error}; the port position is rewind to
the one before this function call.
@end defun


@defun parse-segment-nz-nc @var{port}
Like @func{parse-segment-nz}, but parses the @code{segment-nz-nc}
component which cannot be empty and cannot hold bytes representing colon
characters in @ascii{} encoding: @code{nz-nc} stands for ``non--zero
no--colon''.
@end defun


@defun parse-slash-and-segment @var{port}
Attempt to read from @var{port} the sequence slash character plus
@code{segment} component; notice that an empty @code{segment} is valid.

If these components are successfully read: return a bytevector (possibly
empty) holding the accumulated @code{segment} bytes; the port position
is left pointing to the byte after the last accumulated byte from the
@code{segment}.

If @eof{} or a byte different from slash is read as first byte: return
false; the port position is rewind to the one before this function call.

If an invalid percent--encoded sequence is read, an exception is raised
with type @condition{uri-parser-error}; the port position is rewind to
the one before this function call.
@end defun

@c page
@node parser-tools uri parser path
@subsubsection Path component parser functions


The following functions can be used to parse the @code{path-abempty},
@code{path-absolute}, @code{path-noscheme}, @code{path-rootless} and
@code{path-empty} components; the relevant portion of the grammar is:

@example
path-abempty  = *( "/" segment )
path-absolute = "/" [ segment-nz *( "/" segment ) ]
path-noscheme = segment-nz-nc *( "/" segment )
path-rootless = segment-nz *( "/" segment )
path-empty    = 0<pchar>
@end example

@noindent
notice that all the @code{path-*} components appear in the grammar as
last components of a @code{hier-part} or @code{relative-part} component,
which in turn can be followed only by @eof{}, a query (starting with a
@samp{?} byte) or a fragment (starting with a @samp{#} byte).

The following bindings are exported by the library @library{nausicaa
parser-tools uri}.  All the functions accept a @var{port} argument: it
must be a binary input port supporting the port position.


@defun parse-path-empty @var{port}
Parse a @code{path-empty} component.  Lookahead one byte from
@var{port}: if it is @eof{} or a question mark or number--sign in
@ascii{} encoding: return null; else return @false{}.

In any case leave the port position where it was before the function
call.

@example
(import (vicare)
  (prefix (nausicaa parser-tools uri) uri.))

(define (mkport S)
  (open-bytevector-input-port (string->ascii S)))

(uri.parse-path-empty (mkport ""))
@result{} ()

(let ((P (mkport "ciao")))
  (uri.parse-path-empty P)      @result{} #f
  (ascii->string
    (get-bytevector-some P)))   @result{} "ciao"

(let ((P (mkport "/ciao")))
  (uri.parse-path-empty P)      @result{} #f
  (ascii->string
    (get-bytevector-some P)))   @result{} "/ciao"

(let ((P (mkport "?query")))
  (uri.parse-path-empty P)      @result{} ()
  (ascii->string
    (get-bytevector-some P)))   @result{} "?query"

(let ((P (mkport "#fragment")))
  (uri.parse-path-empty P)      @result{} ()
  (ascii->string
    (get-bytevector-some P)))   @result{} "#fragment"
@end example
@end defun


@defun parse-path-abempty @var{port}
Parse from @var{port} a, possibly empty, sequence of sequences: byte
representing the slash character in @ascii{} encoding, @code{segment}
component.  Return a possibly empty list holding bytevectors
representing the segments.

If successful: leave the port position to the byte after the last read
byte; if an error occurs: rewind the port position to the one before
this function call.

If an invalid percent--encoded sequence is read, an exception is raised
with type @condition{parser-error}; the port position is rewind to the
one before this function call.

@example
(import (vicare)
  (prefix (nausicaa parser-tools uri) uri.))

(define (mkport S)
  (open-bytevector-input-port (string->ascii S)))

(uri.parse-path-abempty (mkport ""))   @result{} ()

(let ((P (mkport "?query")))
  (uri.parse-path-abempty P)                @result{} ()
  (ascii->string (get-bytevector-some P)))  @result{} "?query"

(let ((P (mkport "#fragment")))
  (uri.parse-path-abempty P)                @result{} ()
  (ascii->string (get-bytevector-some P)))  @result{} "#fragment"

(let ((P (mkport "/ciao")))
  (map ascii->string
    (uri.parse-path-abempty P))             @result{} ("ciao")
  (eof-object? (lookahead-u8 P)))           @result{} #t

(let ((P (mkport "/ciao?query")))
  (map ascii->string
    (uri.parse-path-abempty P))             @result{} ("ciao")
  (ascii->string (get-bytevector-some P)))  @result{} "?query"

(let ((P (mkport "/ciao#fragment")))
  (map ascii->string
    (uri.parse-path-abempty P))             @result{} ("ciao")
  (ascii->string (get-bytevector-some P)))  @result{} "#fragment"

(let ((P (mkport "/ciao/hello")))
  (map ascii->string
    (uri.parse-path-abempty P))    @result{} ("ciao" "hello")
  (eof-object? (lookahead-u8 P)))  @result{} #t

(let ((P (mkport "/ciao/")))
  (map ascii->string
    (uri.parse-path-abempty P))    @result{} ("ciao" "")
  (eof-object? (lookahead-u8 P)))  @result{} #t

(map ascii->string
  (uri.parse-path-abempty (mkport "///")))
@result{} ("" "" "")
@end example
@end defun


@defun parse-path-absolute @var{port}
Parse from @var{port} a @code{path-absolute} component; it is like
@func{parse-path-abempty}, but expects a slash character as first byte
and a non--slash as second byte.  Return a possibly empty list holding
bytevectors representing the segments, or @false{} if invalid bytes are
read from the port.

If successful: leave the port position to the byte after the last read
byte; if an error occurs: rewind the port position to the one before
this function call.

Notice that a @code{path-absolute} can be just a slash character, with
no segments attached.

@example
(import (vicare)
  (prefix (nausicaa parser-tools uri) uri.))

(define (mkport S)
  (open-bytevector-input-port (string->ascii S)))

(uri.parse-path-absolute (mkport ""))
@result{} #f

(let ((P (mkport "ciao")))
  (uri.parse-path-absolute P)               @result{} #f
  (ascii->string (get-bytevector-some P)))  @result{} "ciao"

(let ((P (mkport "/")))
  (map ascii->string
    (uri.parse-path-absolute P))            @result{} ("")
    (eof-object? (lookahead-u8 P)))         @result{} #t

(let ((P (mkport "//")))
  (uri.parse-path-absolute P)               @result{} #f
  (ascii->string (get-bytevector-some P)))  @result{} "//"

(let ((P (mkport "/ciao")))
  (map ascii->string
    (uri.parse-path-absolute P))            @result{} ("ciao")
  (eof-object? (lookahead-u8 P)))           @result{} #t

(let ((P (mkport "/ciao/salut")))
  (map ascii->string
    (uri.parse-path-absolute P))   @result{} ("ciao" "salut")
  (eof-object? (lookahead-u8 P)))  @result{} #t

(let ((P (mkport "/ciao/")))
  (map ascii->string
    (uri.parse-path-absolute P))   @result{} ("ciao" "")
  (eof-object? (lookahead-u8 P)))  @result{} #t

(let ((P (mkport "/?query")))
  (map ascii->string
    (uri.parse-path-absolute P))            @result{} ("")
  (ascii->string (get-bytevector-some P)))  @result{} "?query"

(let ((P (mkport "/ciao?query")))
  (map ascii->string
    (uri.parse-path-absolute P))            @result{} ("ciao")
  (ascii->string (get-bytevector-some P)))  @result{} "?query"

(let ((P (mkport "/#fragment")))
  (map ascii->string
    (uri.parse-path-absolute P))            @result{} ("")
  (ascii->string (get-bytevector-some P)))  @result{} "#fragment"

(let ((P (mkport "/ciao#fragment")))
  (map ascii->string
    (uri.parse-path-absolute P))            @result{} ("ciao")
  (ascii->string (get-bytevector-some P)))  @result{} "#fragment"
@end example
@end defun


@defun parse-path-noscheme @var{port}
Parse from @var{port} a @code{path-noscheme} component.  Return a
non--empty list holding bytevectors representing the segments, or
@false{} if invalid bytes are read from the port.

If successful: leave the port position to the byte after the last read
byte; if an error occurs: rewind the port position to the one before
this function call.

Notice that a @code{path-noscheme} must not start with a slash
character, and then it must have at least one non--empty @code{segment}
component; the first @code{segment} must not contain a colon caracter.

@example
(import (vicare)
  (prefix (nausicaa parser-tools uri) uri.))

(define (mkport S)
  (open-bytevector-input-port (string->ascii S)))

(uri.parse-path-noscheme (mkport "")) @result{} #f

(let ((P (mkport "ciao")))
  (map ascii->string
    (uri.parse-path-noscheme P))   @result{} ("ciao")
  (eof-object? (lookahead-u8 P)))  @result{} #t

(let ((P (mkport "/")))
  (uri.parse-path-noscheme P)               @result{} #f
  (ascii->string (get-bytevector-some P)))  @result{} "/"

(let ((P (mkport "/ciao")))
  (uri.parse-path-noscheme P)               @result{} #f
  (ascii->string (get-bytevector-some P)))  @result{} "/"

(let ((P (mkport "ciao/hello")))
  (map ascii->string
    (uri.parse-path-noscheme P))   @result{} ("ciao" "hello")
  (eof-object? (lookahead-u8 P)))  @result{} #t

(let ((P (mkport "ciao/")))
  (map ascii->string
    (uri.parse-path-noscheme P))  @result{} ("ciao" "")
  (eof-object? (lookahead-u8 P))) @result{} #t

(let ((P (mkport "ciao/he:llo")))
  (map ascii->string
   (uri.parse-path-noscheme P))   @result{} ("ciao" "he:llo")
  (eof-object? (lookahead-u8 P))) @result{} #t

(let ((P (mkport "ci:ao/hello")))
  (uri.parse-path-noscheme P)     @result{} #f
  (ascii->string
    (get-bytevector-some P)))     @result{} "ci:ao/hello"

(let ((P (mkport "?query")))
  (uri.parse-path-noscheme P)     @result{} #f
  (ascii->string
    (get-bytevector-some P)))     @result{} "?query"

(let ((P (mkport "hello?ciao")))
  (map ascii->string
   (uri.parse-path-noscheme P))   @result{} ("hello")
  (ascii->string
    (get-bytevector-some P)))     @result{} "?ciao"

(let ((P (mkport "#fragment")))
  (uri.parse-path-noscheme P)     @result{} #f
  (ascii->string
    (get-bytevector-some P)))     @result{} "#fragment"

(let ((P (mkport "hello#fragment")))
  (map ascii->string
    (uri.parse-path-noscheme P))  @result{} ("hello")
  (ascii->string
    (get-bytevector-some P)))     @result{} "#fragment"
@end example
@end defun


@defun parse-path-rootless @var{port}
Parse from @var{port} a @code{path-rootless} component; it is like
@func{parse-path-abempty}, but expects a non--slash character as first
byte.  Return a non--empty list holding bytevectors representing the
segments, or @false{} if invalid bytes are read from the port.

If successful: leave the port position to the byte after the last read
byte; if an error occurs: rewind the port position to the one before
this function call.

Notice that a @code{path-rootless} must not start with a slash
character, and then it must have at least one non--empty @code{segment}
component.

@example
(import (vicare)
  (prefix (nausicaa parser-tools uri) uri.))

(define (mkport S)
  (open-bytevector-input-port (string->ascii S)))

(uri.parse-path-rootless (mkport ""))  @result{} #f

(let ((P (mkport "ciao")))
  (map ascii->string
    (uri.parse-path-rootless P))   @result{} ("ciao")
  (eof-object? (lookahead-u8 P)))  @result{} #t

(let ((P (mkport "/")))
  (uri.parse-path-rootless P)      @result{} #f
  (ascii->string
    (get-bytevector-some P)))      @result{} "/"

(let ((P (mkport "/ciao")))
  (uri.parse-path-rootless P)      @result{} #f
  (ascii->string
    (get-bytevector-some P)))      @result{} "/ciao"

(let ((P (mkport "ciao/hello")))
  (map ascii->string
    (uri.parse-path-rootless P))   @result{} ("ciao" "hello")
  (eof-object? (lookahead-u8 P)))  @result{} #t

(let ((P (mkport "ciao/")))
  (map ascii->string
    (uri.parse-path-rootless P))   @result{} ("ciao" "")
  (eof-object? (lookahead-u8 P)))  @result{} #t

(let ((P (mkport "ci:ao/hel:lo")))
  (map ascii->string
    (uri.parse-path-rootless P))   @result{} ("ci:ao" "hel:lo")
  (eof-object? (lookahead-u8 P)))  @result{} #t

(let ((P (mkport "?query")))
  (uri.parse-path-rootless P)      @result{} #f
  (ascii->string
    (get-bytevector-some P))       @result{} "?query"

(let ((P (mkport "ciao?query")))
  (uri.parse-path-rootless P)      @result{} ("ciao")
  (ascii->string
    (get-bytevector-some P))       @result{} "?query"

(let ((P (mkport "#fragment")))
  (uri.parse-path-rootless P)      @result{} #f
  (ascii->string
    (get-bytevector-some P))       @result{} "#fragment"

(let ((P (mkport "ciao#fragment")))
  (uri.parse-path-rootless P)      @result{} ("ciao")
  (ascii->string
    (get-bytevector-some P))       @result{} "#fragment"
@end example
@end defun

@c page
@node parser-tools uri parser main
@subsubsection Main components parser functions


The following functions can be used to parse the @code{URI},
@code{absolute-URI}, @code{relative-ref} and @code{path} components; the
relevant portion of the grammar is:

@example
URI           = scheme ":" hier-part [ "?" query ] [ "#" fragment ]

relative-ref  = relative-part [ "?" query ] [ "#" fragment ]

absolute-URI  = scheme ":" hier-part [ "?" query ]

path          = path-abempty    ; begins with "/" or is empty
              | path-absolute   ; begins with "/" but not "//"
              | path-noscheme   ; begins with a non-colon segment
              | path-rootless   ; begins with a segment
              | path-empty      ; zero characters

hier-part     = "//" authority path-abempty
              | path-absolute
              | path-rootless
              | path-empty

relative-part = "//" authority path-abempty
              | path-absolute
              | path-noscheme
              | path-empty
@end example

The following bindings are exported by the library @library{nausicaa
parser-tools uri}.  All the functions accept a @var{port} argument: it
must be a binary input port supporting the port position.


@defun parse-uri @var{port}
Read bytes from @var{PORT} expecting to get, from the first byte to the
@eof{}, a @code{URI} component; parse the input decomposing it into its
subcomponents.  This function does not decode the percent--encoded
bytes.

Return multiple values being:

@table @var
@item scheme
A bytevector representing the @code{scheme} component; @false{} if the
@code{scheme} is not present.  According to the @rfc{}: the
@code{scheme} component is mandatory, but this function accepts its
absence.

@item authority
A bytevector representing the @code{authority} component, not including
the leading slashes; @false{} if the @code{authority} is not present.

@item userinfo
A bytevector representing the @code{userinfo} component, not including
the ending at--sign; @false{} if the @code{userinfo} is not present.

@item host-type
One of the symbols: @code{reg-name}, @code{ipv4-address},
@code{ipv6-address}, @code{ipvfuture}; when the host is empty: this
value is @code{reg-name}.

@item host
Host data represented as the second return value from @func{parse-host}
and associated to the symbol above.

@item port
A bytevector representing the @code{port} component; @false{} if the
@code{port} is not present.

@item path-type
One of the symbols: @code{path-abempty}, @code{path-empty},
@code{path-absolute}, @code{path-rootless}.  When the @code{authority}
is present: this value is always @code{path-abempty}.

@item path
A possibly empty list representing the path segments.

@item query
A bytevector representing the @code{query} component; @false{} when the
@code{query} is not present.

@item fragment
A bytevector representing the @code{fragment} component; @false{} when the
@code{fragment} is not present.
@end table

If the host cannot be classified in @code{reg-name}, @code{ip-literal}
or @code{ipvfuture}: an exception is raised with condition components
@condition{uri-parser-error}, @condition{who}, @condition{message},
@condition{irritants}, the irritants being the input port.

If the path cannot be classified: an exception is raised with condition
components @condition{uri-parser-error}, @condition{who},
@condition{message}, @condition{irritants}, the irritants being the
input port.
@end defun


@defun parse-relative-ref @var{port}
Read bytes from @var{port} expecting to get, from the first byte to the
@eof{}, a @code{relative-ref} component; parse the input decomposing it
into its subcomponents.  This function does not decode the
percent--encoded bytes.

Return multiple values being:

@table @var
@item authority
A bytevector representing the @code{authority} component, not including
the leading slashes; @false{} if the @code{authority} is not present.

@item userinfo
A bytevector representing the @code{userinfo} component, not including
the ending at--sign; @false{} if the @code{userinfo} is not present.

@item host-type
One of the symbols: @code{reg-name}, @code{ipv4-address},
@code{ipv6-address}, @code{ipvfuture}; when the host is empty: this
value is @code{reg-name}.

@item host
Host data represented as the second return value from @func{parse-host}
and associated to the symbol above.

@item port
A bytevector representing the @code{port} component; @false{} if the
@code{port} is not present.

@item path-type
One of the symbols: @code{path-abempty}, @code{path-empty},
@code{path-absolute}, @code{path-noscheme}.  When the @code{authority}
is present: this value is always @code{path-abempty}.

@item path
A possibly empty list representing the path segments.

@item query
A bytevector representing the @code{query} component; @false{} when the
@code{query} is not present.

@item fragment
A bytevector representing the @code{fragment} component; @false{} when the
@code{fragment} is not present.
@end table

If the host cannot be classified in @code{reg-name}, @code{ip-literal}
or @code{ipvfuture}: an exception is raised with condition components
@condition{uri-parser-error}, @condition{who}, @condition{message},
@condition{irritants}, the irritants being the input port.

If the path cannot be classified: an exception is raised with condition
components @condition{uri-parser-error}, @condition{who},
@condition{message}, @condition{irritants}, the irritants being the
input port.
@end defun


@defun parse-path @var{port}
Parse from @var{port} a @code{path} component.  Return two values:
@false{} or one of the symbols: @code{path-empty}, @code{path-absolute},
@code{path-abempty}, @code{path-noscheme}, @code{path-rootless}; the
list of bytevectors representing the segments, possibly null.

If successful: leave the port position to the byte after the last read
byte; if an error occurs: rewind the port position to the one before
this function call.

Notice that the @code{path} component can be followed only by @eof{}; if
the path cannot be classified: an exception is raised with condition
components @condition{uri-parser-error}, @condition{who},
@condition{message}, @condition{irritants}, the irritants being the
input port.

@example
(import (vicare)
  (prefix (nausicaa parser-tools uri) uri.))

(define (mkport S)
  (open-bytevector-input-port (string->ascii S)))

(uri.parse-path (mkport ""))  @result{} path-empty ()

(uri.parse-path (mkport "?query"))  @error{} &uri-parser-error
(uri.parse-path (mkport "#fragment"))  @error{} &uri-parser-error

(uri.parse-path (mkport "/"))
@result{} path-absolute (#vu8())

(let*-values
    (((P)          (mkport "/ciao/hello/salut"))
     ((type path)  (uri.parse-path P)))
  type                         @result{} path-absolute
  (map ascii->string path))    @result{} ("ciao" "hello" "salut")

(let*-values
    (((P)          (mkport "//"))
     ((type path)  (uri.parse-path P)))
  type                         @result{} path-abempty
  (map ascii->string path))    @result{} ("" "")

(let*-values
    (((P)          (mkport "///"))
     ((type path)  (uri.parse-path P)))
  type                         @result{} path-abempty
  (map ascii->string path))    @result{} ("" "" "")

(let*-values
    (((P)          (mkport "//ciao/"))
     ((type path)  (uri.parse-path P)))
  type                         @result{} path-abempty
  (map ascii->string path))    @result{} ("" "ciao" "")

(let*-values
    (((P)          (mkport "ciao/hello"))
     ((type path)  (uri.parse-path P)))
  type                         @result{} path-noscheme
  (map ascii->string path))    @result{} ("ciao" "hello")

(let*-values
    (((P)          (mkport "ci:ao/hello"))
     ((type path)  (uri.parse-path P)))
  type                         @result{} path-rootless
  (map ascii->string path))    @result{} ("ci:ao" "hello")
@end example
@end defun

@c page
@node parser-tools uri parser misc
@subsubsection Miscellaneous parser functions


The functions can be used to parse the elements of a @uri{}; all the
functions accept a @var{port} argument: it must be a binary input port
supporting the port position.  The following bindings are exported by
the @library{nausicaa parser-tools uri} library.


@defun valid-component? @var{port}
Scan bytes from @var{port} until @eof{} or an invalid byte is found;
return two values, when success: true and the port position of the last
byte read; when failure: false and the port position of the invalid
byte.  In any case: the port position is reverted to the state it had
before the call to this function.

Ensure that:

@itemize
@item
A byte representing the percent character in @ascii{} encoding is
followed by two bytes representing hexadecimal digits in @ascii{}
encoding.

@item
All the non percent--encoded bytes are in the unreserved set defined by
@rfc{} 3986.
@end itemize
@end defun

@c page
@node parser-tools uri class
@subsection Class interfaces


The class interface to @uri{} parsing and producing is really basic;
this is because advanced handling of @uri{}s should be merged with
requirements of specific @uri{} schemes, like @code{http:} and
@code{file:}.

@menu
* parser-tools uri class uri::          The @class{uri} class.
* parser-tools uri class relative-ref:: The @class{relative-ref} class.
@end menu

@c page
@node parser-tools uri class uri
@subsubsection The @class{uri} class


The following bindings are exported by the @library{nausicaa parser-tools uri}
library.


@deftp Class @aclass{uri}
Represents a parsed @code{URI} component.
@end deftp


@defcv {Mutable field} @aclass{uri} scheme
The @code{scheme} component as a bytevector.  Remember that
@code{scheme} is mandatory and does not contain percent--encoded
characters.
@end defcv


@defcv {Mutable field} @aclass{uri} authority
The @code{authority} component as a bytevector, or false if there is no
@code{authority} component.  Percent--encoded characters are not decoded
in this field.
@end defcv


@defcv {Mutable field} @aclass{uri} userinfo
The @code{userinfo} component as a percent--decoded bytevector
@strong{not} containing the trailing at character, or false if there is
no @code{userinfo} component.
@end defcv


@defcv {Mutable field} @aclass{uri} host-type
A Scheme symbol among: @code{reg-name}, @code{ipv4-address},
@code{ipv6-address}, @code{ipvfuture}; when the host is empty: this
value is @code{reg-name}.
@end defcv


@defcv {Mutable field} @aclass{uri} host
Host data represented as the second return value from @func{parse-host}
and associated to the symbol above.  When @code{host-type} is
@code{reg-name}: the value is a percent--decoded bytevector.
@end defcv


@defcv {Mutable field} @aclass{uri} port
The @code{port} component as a bytevector, or false if no @code{port} is
present.  Remember that @code{port} does not contain percent--encoded
characters.
@end defcv


@defcv {Mutable field} @aclass{uri} path-type
A Scheme symbol among: @code{path-abempty}, @code{path-empty},
@code{path-rootless}, @code{path-absolute}; represents the type of the
@code{path} field.
@end defcv


@defcv {Mutable field} @aclass{uri} path
A possibly empty list holding percent--decoded bytevectors representing
the path segments.
@end defcv


@defcv {Mutable field} @aclass{uri} query
The @code{query} component as a percent--decoded bytevector @strong{not}
containing the leading question mark, or false if there is no
@code{query} component.
@end defcv


@defcv {Mutable field} @aclass{uri} fragment
The @code{fragment} component as a percent--decoded bytevector
@strong{not} containing the leading number--sign, or false if there is
no @code{fragment} component.
@end defcv


@defcv {Immutable virtual field} @aclass{uri} bytevector
A bytevector representing the whole @uri{}.
@end defcv


@defcv {Immutable virtual field} @aclass{uri} string
A string representing the whole @uri{}; it is built from the
@code{bytevector} field with the @func{to-string} function.
@end defcv


@defop Syntax @aclass{uri} make* @aclass{uri} @meta{source-bytevector}
Build and return a new @class{uri} instance holding fields from parsing
@var{source-bytevector}; it relies on parsing with @func{parse-uri}.
@end defop


@defop Syntax @aclass{uri} make @aclass{uri} @meta{clause} ...
@defopx {Auxiliary Syntax} @aclass{uri} source-bytevector @meta{expr}
Build and return a new @class{uri} instance holding fields from parsing
@var{expr}, which must be a bytevector; it relies on parsing with
@func{parse-uri}.
@end defop


@defop Syntax @aclass{uri} is-a? @var{expr} @aclass{uri}
Return true if @var{expr} evaluates to an instance of @class{uri}.
@end defop

@c page
@node parser-tools uri class relative-ref
@subsubsection The @class{relative-ref} class


The following bindings are exported by the @library{nausicaa parser-tools uri}
library.


@deftp Class @aclass{relative-ref}
Represents a parsed @code{relative-ref} component.
@end deftp


@defcv {Mutable field} @aclass{relative-ref} authority
The @code{authority} component as a bytevector, or false if there is no
@code{authority} component.  Percent--encoded characters are not decoded
in this field.
@end defcv


@defcv {Mutable field} @aclass{relative-ref} userinfo
The @code{userinfo} component as a percent--decoded bytevector
@strong{not} containing the trailing at character, or false if there is
no @code{userinfo} component.
@end defcv


@defcv {Mutable field} @aclass{uri} host-type
A Scheme symbol among: @code{reg-name}, @code{ipv4-address},
@code{ipv6-address}, @code{ipvfuture}; when the host is empty: this
value is @code{reg-name}.
@end defcv


@defcv {Mutable field} @aclass{uri} host
Host data represented as the second return value from @func{parse-host}
and associated to the symbol above.  When @code{host-type} is
@code{reg-name}: the value is a percent--decoded bytevector.
@end defcv


@defcv {Mutable field} @aclass{relative-ref} port
The @code{port} component as a bytevector, or false if no @code{port} is
present.  Remember that @code{port} does not contain percent--encoded
characters.
@end defcv


@defcv {Mutable field} @aclass{relative-ref} path-type
A Scheme symbol among: @code{path-abempty}, @code{path-empty},
@code{path-noscheme}, @code{path-absolute}; represents the type of the
@code{path} field.
@end defcv


@defcv {Mutable field} @aclass{relative-ref} path
A possibly empty list holding percent--decoded bytevectors representing
the path segments.
@end defcv


@defcv {Mutable field} @aclass{relative-ref} query
The @code{query} component as a percent--decoded bytevector @strong{not}
containing the leading question mark, or false if there is no
@code{query} component.
@end defcv


@defcv {Mutable field} @aclass{relative-ref} fragment
The @code{fragment} component as a percent--decoded bytevector
@strong{not} containing the leading number--sign, or false if there is
no @code{fragment} component.
@end defcv


@defcv {Immutable virtual field} @aclass{relative-ref} bytevector
A bytevector representing the whole @uri{}.
@end defcv


@defcv {Immutable virtual field} @aclass{relative-ref} string
A string representing the whole @uri{}; it is built from the
@code{bytevector} field with the @func{to-string} function.
@end defcv


@defop Syntax @aclass{relative-ref} make* @aclass{relative-ref} @meta{source-bytevector}
Build and return a new @class{relative-ref} instance holding fields from
parsing @var{source-bytevector}; it relies on parsing with
@func{parse-uri}.
@end defop


@defop Syntax @aclass{relative-ref} make @aclass{relative-ref} @meta{clause} ...
@defopx {Auxiliary Syntax} @aclass{relative-ref} source-bytevector @meta{expr}
Build and return a new @class{relative-ref} instance holding fields from
parsing @var{expr}, which must be a bytevector; it relies on parsing
with @func{parse-uri}.
@end defop



@defop Syntax @aclass{relative-ref} is-a? @var{expr} @aclass{relative-ref}
Return true if @var{expr} evaluates to an instance of
@class{relative-ref}.
@end defop

@c page
@node parser-tools uri misc
@subsection Miscellaneous functions


@defun normalise-path @var{input}
Normalise a list of bytevectors representing an absolute path;
bytevectors holding single and double dots are removed.

@example
(import (vicare)
  (prefix (nausicaa parser-tools uri) uri.))

(define-syntax doit
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((_ ?input)
     (map ascii->string
       (uri.normalise-path
         (map string->ascii
           (quote ?input)))))))

(doit ())       @result{} ()
(doit ("a"))    @result{} ("a")
(doit ("."))    @result{} ()
(doit (".."))   @result{} ()
(doit ("a" "b" "c" "." ".." ".." "g"))
@result{} ("a" "g")
@end example
@end defun

@c end of file
