@node notes
@appendix Miscellaneous notes on everything


@menu
* notes nan::                   How to deal with not--a--number.
@end menu

@c page
@node notes nan
@appendixsec How to deal with not--a--number


@cindex How to deal with NaN
@cindex NaN, how to deal with it


The not--a--number value, @dfn{NaN} for short, represents the result of
a @emph{wrong} computation.  NaN can appear as literal in Scheme source
code as @samp{+nan.0} or @samp{-nan.0}, and it can be the result of an
expression composing Scheme arithmetic functions.  NaN has @strong{no
sign}, @samp{+nan.0} and @samp{-nan.0} have the same semantic meaning.

What follows is just a set of notes with no commitment to rigour in
Mathematics.  For more informations on NaN, start from:

@quotation
Wikipedia contributors.  ``Not a number''.  Wikipedia, The Free
Encyclopedia.
@url{http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=NaN&oldid=303402207}
(accessed July 21, 2009).
@end quotation

@noindent
see also:

@quotation
Wikipedia contributors.  ``Division by zero''.  Wikipedia, The Free
Encyclopedia.
@url{http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Division_by_zero&oldid=303258289}
(accessed July 21, 2009).
@end quotation

Being that NaN is a little weird, let's start by understanding how to
deal with infinities first.

@menu
* notes nan inf::               How to deal with infinities.
* notes nan nan::               Understanding not--a--number.
@end menu

@c page
@node notes nan inf
@appendixsubsec How to deal with infinities


Infinities can appear as literals in Scheme source code as @samp{+inf.0}
or @samp{-inf.0}, and they can be the result of an expression composing
Scheme arithmetic functions.

We have to distinguish between @dfn{number objects} as defined in
@rnrs{6} Scheme, and @dfn{numbers} as defined by Mathematics.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Infinities in the mathematical realm

We can take that Algebra defines @dfn{groups} as couples @math{(S, o)}
where: @math{S} is a set of mathematical entities, @math{o} is an
operation that composes two entities in @math{S} and evaluates to some
mathematical entity.  We can define the group @math{(R, +)}, where
@math{R} is the set of real numbers and @math{+} is the common addition,
because they are compliant with the following axioms:

@table @emph
@item Closure
For every couple of reals, their sum is a real.

@item Associativity
For every triplet of reals:

@example
a + (b + c) = (a + b) + c
@end example

@item Identity element
There exists a unique real @math{0} for which, for every real @math{a}:

@example
0 + a = a + 0 = a
@end example

@item Inverse element
For every real @math{a} there is a unique other real @math{b} for which:

@example
a + b = 0  @result{}  a = -b
@end example
@end table

@noindent
the existence of the inverse element for addition allows the definition
of subtraction.  The couple @math{(R, *)}, the reals with the ordinary
product, is also a group:

@table @emph
@item Closure
@example
\forall a, b \in R     a * b = c   c \in R
@end example

@item Associativity
@example
a * (b * c) = (a * b) * c
@end example

@item Identity element
@example
1 * a = a * 1 = a
@end example

@item Inverse element
@example
a * b = 1  @result{}  a = 1/b
@end example
@end table

@noindent
the existence of the inverse element for multiplication allows the
definition of division.

The triplet @math{(S, +, *)} in which @math{S} is a set of mathematical
entities, and @math{+} and @math{*} are composition operations with the
properties for a group, is called @dfn{field} if the following
additional axioms hold:

@table @emph
@item Commutativity
@example
a + b = b + a    a * b = b * a
@end example

@item Distributivity
@example
a * (b + c) = a * b + a * c
@end example
@end table

Human experience shows that it is convenient to state (simplified):
Every mathematical entity which is not compliant with the axioms of a
field is not a number.

Infinities are abstract mathematical entities which we can define
through the following disequations:

@example
\forall r \in R        -\infty < r < +\infty
@end example

@noindent
which means:

@itemize
@item
Positive infinity is comparable to numbers and it is greater than all
the positive numbers.

@item
Negative infinity is comparable to numbers and it is lesser than all the
negative number.
@end itemize

@noindent
we notice that the comparison operator @math{<} does not define a group,
because the result of @math{1 < 2} (as defined in Mathematics) is a
boolean value not a number.@footnote{This holds despite the fact that
many programming languages allow a disequation to yield a number.}

Despite the fact that we can compare them to numbers, @strong{infinities
are not numbers in the Mathematics sense.}  We can show this with the
following simple mathematical computation; let's consider the following
equation:

@example
4 + +\infty = x
@end example

@noindent
what should we take as value for @math{x}?  @math{x} cannot be a number
like, say, @math{8}, because:

@example
4 + +\infty = 8
@result{} +\infty = 8 - 4 = 4
@result{} +\infty = 4  Wrong!
@end example

@noindent
the only answer that tries to make some sense is @math{x = +\infty}, but
then:

@example
4 + +\infty = +\infty
@result{}  4 = +\infty - +\infty = 0
@result{}  4 = 0  Wrong!
@end example

@noindent
if we assume that infinities are numbers, some perfectly legal algebraic
manipulation yields a wrong result.  Human beings define mathematical
entities based on their usefulness; human experience shows that it is
more useful to avoid absurd equations like @math{4 = 0}, than to define
infinities as numbers.

So, infinities are @strong{not} numbers and the equation @math{4 +
\infty = x} is wrong in the sense that, in Mathematics, it is an error
to write it.

Mathematics is not ``perfect'', in the sense that it allows us to write
wrong equations; unfortunately we can recognise an equation as wrong
only by trying to solve it.

Let's look at this equation:

@example
   4 - 3       1
------------ = - = x
12 - (4 + 8)   0
@end example

@noindent
what should we take as value for @math{x}?

If we had the limit:

@example
         1
\lim    --- = x      t > 0
t -> 0   t
@end example

@noindent
we would know that @math{x -> +\infty} (@math{x} approaches
@math{+\infty}, it is not equal to it).  Computing @math{1 / t} for
@math{t} smaller and smaller, yields a result that is a bigger and
bigger positive number, which approaches the mathematical entity greater
than all the positive numbers; that is @math{+\infty}.

But what about the straight @math{1 / 0 = x}?  The only mathematical
entity that makes sense as answer is @math{x = +\infty}, so @math{1 / 0}
is not a number.  We can demonstrate this with the following simple
computation:

@example
3 * (1 / 0) = y
@result{}  3 / 0 = y
@result{}  3 = y * 0 = 0
@result{}  3 = 0   Wrong!
@end example

@noindent
so, it is impossible for @math{1 / 0} and @math{y} to comply with the
axioms.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Infinities in the computer realm

Number objects are all the Scheme values for which the predicate
@func{number?} returns @true{}.  Both the infinities @samp{+inf.0} and
@samp{-inf.0} are number objects.  This way Scheme defines a class of
values which can be used as arguments to arithmetic procedures, and
which can potentially be the return value of an arithmetic procedure.

We acknowledged that, when a mathematical expression is non--compliant
with the axioms of definition of numbers, we can verify it by doing the
computation and checking the final or partial results.  A computer can
do the same by detecting, for example, if a division has @math{1} and
@math{0} as operands.

It turns out that making a computer processor interrupt a computation
when an expression is wrong, is inefficient.  So two special values were
defined to allow a computation to signal that special error:
@samp{+inf.0} and @samp{-inf.0}.

When a computation returns @samp{+inf.0} and @samp{-inf.0} we know that
the expression was wrong.  @rnrs{6} Scheme defines the following
conventional results:

@example
(div 1 0) @result{} error
(/   1 0) @result{} error

(/   1.0 0)   @result{} +inf.0
(/   1   0.0) @result{} +inf.0
(/   1.0 0.0) @result{} +inf.0
@end example

@noindent
when both the operands are exact, the expression raises an error; when
one of the operands is inexact, the expression yields infinity.

Special rules were defined to avoid to mistake a wrong computation for a
correct one; for example:

@example
(+ 44 (* 23 +inf.0)) @result{} +inf.0
(+ 44 (* 23 -inf.0)) @result{} -inf.0
@end example

@noindent
we know that both of these are wrong, but we also know that they are
wrong in that special way for which returning an infinity makes some
sense.  It is our responsibility to decide what to do.

The special rules makes it impossible for an expression to return a
finite number if one of the partial results was an infinity.  Sometimes
the composition of two infinities can yield an infinity with no
confusion; examples:

@example
(+ +inf.0 +inf.0) @result{} +inf.0
(+ -inf.0 -inf.0) @result{} -inf.0

(- +inf.0 -inf.0) @result{} +inf.0  ;like (+ +inf.0 +inf.0)
(- -inf.0 +inf.0) @result{} -inf.0  ;like (+ -inf.0 -inf.0)
(- +inf.0 -inf.0) @result{} +inf.0  ;like (+ +inf.0 +inf.0)

(* +inf.0 +inf.0) @result{} -inf.0
(* +inf.0 -inf.0) @result{} -inf.0
(* -inf.0 -inf.0) @result{} +inf.0
@end example

@noindent
but some expressions are difficult to deal with:

@example
(+ +inf.0 -inf.0) @result{} ?
(+ -inf.0 +inf.0) @result{} ?

(- -inf.0 -inf.0) @result{} ?
(- -inf.0 +inf.0) @result{} ?

(/ +inf.0 +inf.0) @result{} ?
(/ +inf.0 -inf.0) @result{} ?
(/ -inf.0 +inf.0) @result{} ?
(/ -inf.0 -inf.0) @result{} ?
@end example

@noindent
neither a number nor an infinity makes sense as result here; we need
NaN.

@c page
@node notes nan nan
@appendixsubsec Understanding not--a--number


NaN is a special value used as result of a wrong expression.  We have
seen that the composition of infinities is not always defined; in those
cases the result is NaN:

@example
(+ +inf.0 -inf.0) @result{} +nan.0
(+ -inf.0 +inf.0) @result{} +nan.0

(- -inf.0 -inf.0) @result{} +nan.0
(- -inf.0 +inf.0) @result{} +nan.0

(/ +inf.0 +inf.0) @result{} +nan.0
(/ +inf.0 -inf.0) @result{} +nan.0
(/ -inf.0 +inf.0) @result{} +nan.0
(/ -inf.0 -inf.0) @result{} +nan.0
@end example

@noindent
also it is:

@example
(div 0   0)   @result{} <error>
(/   0   0)   @result{} <error>
(/   0.0 0)   @result{} +nan.0
(/   0   0.0) @result{} +nan.0
(/   0.0 0.0) @result{} +nan.0
@end example

@noindent
because, in Mathematics, @math{0 / 0} is not compliant to the axioms:

@example
(0 / 0) = y
@result{}  0 * y = 0    y is not unique
@end example

Special rules were defined so that an arithmetic composition between NaN
and another number always returns NaN.  This allows us not to mistake a
wrong computation for a correct one:

@example
(+ 1 +nan.0) @result{} +nan.0
(- 1 +nan.0) @result{} +nan.0
(* 1 +nan.0) @result{} +nan.0
(/ 1 +nan.0) @result{} +nan.0
@end example

@noindent
we have to beware, though, that some non--arithmetic function may hide
the NaN, and give rise to some surprise:

@example
(max 1 +nan.0) @result{} 1.0       ; ! the inexact 1!!
(min 1 +nan.0) @result{} +nan.0    ; !?!
@end example

Scheme defines a predicate to test if a value is NaN, @func{nan?}.
@rnrs{6} Scheme mandates that:

@example
(= +nan.0 +nan.0) @result{} #f
(= +nan.0 z)      @result{} #f
@end example

@noindent
for every number @var{z}.  The first is correct because a wrong
computation is not equal, in numerical sense, to another wrong
computation.

@rnrs{6} Scheme also states that:

@example
(eqv? +nan.0 +nan.0) @result{} <undefined>
@end example

@noindent
but currently all the LIMY Scheme implementations do:

@example
(eqv?   +nan.0 +nan.0) @result{} #t
(equal? +nan.0 +nan.0) @result{} #t
@end example

@noindent
notice that, by definition, @func{equal?} relies on @func{eqv?}.  This
allows us to do tests for wrong computations using not only @func{nan?};
this is especially useful when writing test suites (with more
complicated stuff than this):

@example
(check
    (list (+ 1 2) (/ 0.0 0.0))
  => '(3 +nan.0))
@end example

The behaviour of @func{eqv?} and @func{equal?} does not reduce our
ability to detect wrong expressions; we can always do:

@example
(let ((v (expression)))
  (cond
    ((= v 1)   (some-thing))
    ((nan? v)  (some-other-thing))
    (else      (yet-another-thing))))
@end example

@noindent
@func{eqv?} and @func{equal?} just allow us to do (by definition
@func{case} relies on @func{eqv?}):

@example
(case (expression)
  ((1 2)     (some-thing))
  ((+nan.0)  (some-other-thing))
  (else      (yet-another-thing)))

(let ((v (expression)))
  (cond
    ((= v 1)          (some-thing))
    ((eqv? v +nan.0)  (some-other-thing))
    (else             (yet-another-thing))))
@end example

@noindent
which, in some situations, is one more possibility to code the logic of
a function:

@example
(= (expression1) (expression2))
@result{} <bool> ; true if the results are equal numbers

(eqv? (expression1) (expression2))
@result{} <bool> ; true if the results are equal numbers
          ; or are both wrong expressions
@end example

@c end of file
