@node one-dimension
@chapter One dimensional extended ranges


@cindex @library{vicare containers one-dimension-co}, library
@cindex Library @library{vicare containers one-dimension-co}
@cindex @library{vicare containers one-dimension-cc}, library
@cindex Library @library{vicare containers one-dimension-cc}


The one--dimension libraries implement low level operations over
generalised ranges of a coordinate.  They can be used to operate on
ranges of numbers or characters or whatever objects upon which we can
define an ordering.  There are two versions of the library:

@table @asis
@item @library{vicare containers one-dimension-co}
Represents domains of values using disjoint half--open ranges; each
range has a lower--included and an upper--excluded limit.

@item @library{vicare containers one-dimension-cc}
Represents domains of values using disjoint double--closed ranges; each
range has a lower--included and an upper--included limit.
@end table

Both libraries have the same @api{}, meaning that the functions names
and arguments are the same; the only difference in semantics is that
@library{vicare containers one-dimension-co} interprets argument ranges
as half--open, while @library{vicare containers one-dimension-cc}
interprets argument ranges as double--closed.

@menu
* one-dimension intro::         Data types and conventions.
* one-dimension make::          Constructors.
* one-dimension pred::          Predicates.
* one-dimension inspect::       Inspection.
* one-dimension ops::           Operations.
@end menu

@c page
@node one-dimension intro
@section Data types and conventions


A @dfn{range} is a pair representing a half--open interval of items.
The car of the pair if the included lower--limit, called @var{start};
the cdr is the excluded upper--limit, called @var{past}, or the included
upper--limit, called @var{last}.  Empty ranges are @strong{not} valid.

A @dfn{domain} is a sorted list of ranges.  Empty domains are empty
lists.  Ranges in a domain do not overlap and are not contiguous.  A
domain of half--open ranges has the following format:

@example
((start1 . past1) (start2 . past2) (start3 . past3) ...)
@end example

@noindent
with the constraints:

@example
start1 < past1 < start2 < past2 < start3 < past3 < ...
@end example

@noindent
a domain of double--closed ranges has the following format:

@example
((start1 . last1) (start2 . last2) (start3 . last3) ...)
@end example

@noindent
with the constraints:

@example
start1 <= last1 < start2 <= last2 < start3 <= last3 < ...
@end example

The range and domain functions accept the following arguments:

@table @var
@item obj
Any object.

@item item
An object that satisfies the @var{item?} predicate of the selected type.

@item range
A valid range according to @func{%range?}.

@item domain
A valid domain according to @func{%domain?}.

@item start
The included left--limit of a range.

@item past
The excluded lower--limit of a range.

@item last
The included upper--limit of a range.

@item item?
A unary predicate returning @true{} if the argument is a valid item.
For integers it can be @func{integer?}, while for characters it can be
@func{char?}.

If we need to exclude some range of values, we can do it by properly
define this function.  For example, to exclude the integers in the
half--open range @math{[10, 23)} we can use:

@example
(lambda (n)
  (and (integer? n)
       (<= 10  n)
       (<   n 23)))
@end example

@item item=?
An n--ary predicate returning @true{} if the all the arguments are
equal.  @func{char=?} is an example of such a function.

@item item<?
An n--ary predicate returning @true{} if the all the arguments, in the
given order, are in strict increasing order.  @func{char<?} is an
example of such a function.

@item item<=?
An n--ary predicate returning @true{} if the all the arguments, in the
given order, are in non--strict increasing order.  @func{char<=?} is an
example of such a function.

@item item-min
An n--ary function returning the minimum between its arguments.  For
numbers it can be @func{min}, for characters we can use:

@example
(lambda (a b) (if (char<? a b) a b))
@end example

@item item-max
An n--ary function returning the maximum between its arguments.  For
numbers it can be @func{max}, for characters we can use:

@example
(lambda (a b) (if (char<? a b) b a))
@end example

@item item-prev
A binary function accepting an item and a range, or false, as arguments.
The second argument can be @false{}, meaning that no range is specified,
or a pair whose car is the left--limit and whose cdr is the
right--limit; when the range is true, it is guaranteed that the item is
inside the range.

This function must return the value previous to item inside the range;
if it is not possible to compute the previous value, because the lower
bound has been reached: The function must return @false{}.

For integers it can be:

@example
(lambda (x range)       ; with both (one-dimension-cc)
  (let ((x (- x 1)))    ; and (one-dimension-co)
    (if range
        (and (<= (car range) x)
             x)
      x)))
@end example

@noindent
for characters it can be:

@example
(lambda (ch range)      ; with (one-dimension-cc)
  (let* ((x  (- (char->integer ch) 1)))
    (and (number-in-range? x)
         (let ((ch (integer->char x)))
           (if range
               (and (<= x (char->integer (car range)))
                    ch)
             ch)))))

(define (number-in-range? x)
  (or (and (<= 0 x)
           (<  x #xD800))
      (and (<  #xDFFF x)
           (<= x #x10FFFF))))
@end example

@item item-next
A binary function accepting an item and a range, or false, as arguments.
The second argument can be @false{}, meaning that no range is specified,
or a pair whose car is the left--limit and whose cdr is the
right--limit; when the range is true, it is guaranteed that the item is
inside the range.

This function must return the value next to item inside the range; if it
is not possible to compute the next value, because the upper bound has
been reached: The function must return @false{}.

For integers it can be:

@example
(lambda (x range)       ; with (one-dimension-cc)
  (let ((x (+ 1 x)))
    (if range
        (and (<= x (cdr range))
             x)
      x)))

(lambda (x range)       ; with (one-dimension-co)
  (let ((x (+ 1 x)))
    (if range
        (and (< x (cdr range))
             x)
      x)))
@end example

@noindent
for characters it can be:

@example
(lambda (ch range)      ; with (one-dimension-cc)
  (let* ((x  (+ 1 (char->integer c))))
    (and (number-in-range? x)
         (let ((ch (integer->char x)))
           (if range
               (and (<= x (char->integer (cdr range)))
                    ch)
             ch)))))

(define (number-in-range? x)
  (or (and (<= 0 x)
           (<  x #xD800))
      (and (<  #xDFFF x)
           (<= x #x10FFFF))))
@end example

@item item-minus
A binary function:

@itemize
@item
For half--open ranges: It must return the number of items between the
first argument included and the second argument excluded.

@item
For double--closed ranges: It must return the number of items between
the first argument included and the second argument included.
@end itemize

The arithmetic @func{-} applied to integers is an example of such a
function for half--open ranges; for characters and double--closed ranges
we can use:

@example
(lambda (past start)
  (+ 1 (- (char->integer past)
          (char->integer start))))
@end example

@item item-copy
A unary function returning a copy of an item.  For ranges holding atomic
values (like characters or integers) it is fine to use @code{(lambda (x)
x)}.

@item type
A record used as type descriptor for collected items.  It is used as
first arguments to all almost all the functions.  Type descriptors are
built by @func{%make-type-descriptor}.
@end table

@c page
@node one-dimension make
@section Constructors


@defun %make-type-descriptor @var{item?} @var{item=?} @var{item<?} @var{item<=?} @var{item-min} @var{item-max} @var{item-prev} @var{item-next} @var{item-minus} @var{item-copy}
Build and return a new type descriptor.
@end defun


@defun %make-range @var{type} @var{start} @var{past}
@defunx %make-range @var{type} @var{start} @var{last}
Compose @var{start} and @var{past}/@var{last} into a range.  This
function validates the arguments to make sure the resulting range is
valid.
@end defun


@defun %range-copy @var{type} @var{range}
Return a clone of @var{range}.
@end defun


@defun %make-domain @var{type} @var{item/range} ...
Build and return a new domain.  The list of @var{item/range} may be the
empty list or a mixed list of items and ranges.  See
@func{%domain-add-item} and @func{%domain-add-range} for details.
@end defun


@defun %domain-copy @var{type} @var{domain}
Return a newly allocated domain holding a copy of @var{domain}.
@end defun


@defun %domain-add-item @var{type} @var{domain} @var{obj}
Add the single value @var{obj} to @var{domain}, return the new domain.
The returned domain may share some structure with @var{domain}.  If
@var{obj} does not satisfy the @var{item?} function of @var{type}: An
assertion violation is raised.

@var{obj} is interpreted as lower limit of a range and the
@var{item-next} function of @var{type} is used to generate the
corresponding upper limit.  If generating the next item fails: An
assertion violation is raised.
@end defun


@defun %domain-add-range @var{type} @var{domain} @var{range}
Add @var{range} to @var{domain}, return the new domain.  The returned
domain may share some structure with @var{domain}.

@var{range} is a pair of items; it is interpreted as double--closed
range by @library{vicare containers one-dimension-cc} and as half--open
range by @library{vicare containers one-dimensionc-co}.
@end defun

@c page
@node one-dimension pred
@section Predicates


@subsubheading Range predicates


@defun %range? @var{type} @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a valid range.
@end defun


@defun %range-contains? @var{type} @var{range} @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a member of @var{range}.
@end defun


@defun %range=? @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Return @true{} if the ranges are equal.
@end defun


@defun %range<? @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Return @true{} if @var{range-a} has all members less than all members of
@var{range-b}.
@end defun


@defun %range<=? @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Return @true{} if @var{range-a} has all members less than, or equal to,
all members of @var{range-b}.
@end defun


@defun %range-start<? @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Return @true{} if the start of @var{range-a} is less than the start of
@var{range-b}.
@end defun


@defun %range-start<=? @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Return @true{} if the start of @var{range-a} is less than, or equal to,
the start of @var{range-b}.
@end defun


@defun %range-past<? @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
@defunx %range-last<? @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Return @true{} if the past/last of @var{range-a} is less than the past
of @var{range-b}.
@end defun


@defun %range-last<=? @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
@defunx %range-past<=? @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Return @true{} if the past/last of @var{range-a} is less than, or equal
to, the past of @var{range-b}.
@end defun


@defun %range-contiguous? @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Return @true{} if @var{range-a} and @var{range-b} are contiguous.  It
does not matter which range has start less than the other.
@end defun


@defun %range-overlapping? @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Return @true{} if the ranges have some elements in common.
@end defun


@defun %range-superset? @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
@defunx %range-superset?/strict @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Return @true{} if @var{range-a} is a superset or a strict superset of
@var{range-a}.
@end defun


@defun %range-subset? @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
@defunx %range-subset?/strict @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Return @true{} if @var{range-a} is a subset or a strict subset of
@var{range-a}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Domain predicates


@defun %domain? @var{type} @var{domain}
Return true if @var{domain} is a valid domain.
@end defun


@defun %domain-empty? @var{domain}
Return true if the domain is empty.
@end defun


@defun %domain-contains? @var{type} @var{domain} @var{obj}
Return true if @var{obj} is an element of @var{domain}.
@end defun


@defun %domain=? @var{type} @var{domain-a} @var{domain-b}
Return true if the arguments represent the same domain.
@end defun


@defun %domain<? @var{type} @var{domain-a} @var{domain-b}
Return true if all the elements of @var{domain-a} are strictly less than
all the elements of @var{domain-b}.  Empty domains cannot be ordered, so
if an argument is empty the return value is @false{}.
@end defun


@defun %domain-subset? @var{type} @var{domain-a} @var{domain-b}
@defunx %domain-subset?/strict @var{type} @var{domain-a} @var{domain-b}
Return @true{} if @var{domain-a} is a subset or strict subset of
@var{domain-b}.
@end defun


@defun %domain-superset? @var{type} @var{domain-a} @var{domain-b}
@defunx %domain-superset?/strict @var{type} @var{domain-a} @var{domain-b}
Return @true{} if @var{domain-a} is a superset or strict superset of
@var{domain-b}.
@end defun


@c page
@node one-dimension inspect
@section Inspection


@defun %range-length @var{type} @var{range}
Return the number of items in the range.
@end defun


@defun %domain-size @var{type} @var{domain}
Return the number of items in the domain.
@end defun

@c page
@node one-dimension ops
@section Operations


@subsubheading Set operations


@defun %range-intersection @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Return a range representing the intersection of the argument ranges.  It
does not matter which range has start less than the other.

Intersection is a closed operation on the space of ranges: The
intersection of two ranges is a range (possibly empty).  If the ranges
are not overlapping return @false{} to represent the empty range.
@end defun


@defun %range-union @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Return two values representing the union of the argument ranges.  It
does not matter which range has start less than the other.

Union is @strong{not} a closed operation on the space of ranges: The
union of two contiguous or overlapping ranges is a single range, but the
union of two disjoint ranges is the set holding the two argument ranges.

If the argument ranges are disjoint and non--contiguous: Return two
values being @var{range-a} and @var{range-b}.  If the argument ranges
are contiguous or overlapping: Return two values being @false{} and a
new range representing the union.

This function should be called like this:

@example
(let-values (((head tail) (%range-union type r-a r-b)))
  (when head ---)
  (when tail ---))
@end example
@end defun


@defun %range-difference @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Return two values representing the difference between the argument
ranges; the difference is the set of elements present in one range and
not in the other.  It does not matter which range has start less than
the other.

Difference is @strong{not} a closed operation on the space of ranges: In
genreral the result is a couple of ranges.  The first one represents
values which are all less than the values in the second one.  Both the
returned values can be @false{}.

This function should be called like this:

@example
(let-values (((head tail) (%range-difference type r-a r-b)))
  (when head ---)
  (when tail ---))
@end example
@end defun


@defun %range-in-first-only @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Return two values representing the elements of @var{range-a} that are
not in @var{range-b}.

This operation is @strong{not} a closed operation on the space of
ranges: In genreral the result is a couple of ranges.  The first one
represents values which are all less than the values in the second one.
Both the returned values can be @false{}.

This function should be called like this:

@example
(let-values (((head tail) (%range-in-first-only type r-a r-b)))
  (when head ---)
  (when tail ---))
@end example
@end defun


@defun %domain-intersection @var{type} @var{domain-a} @var{domain-b}
Return a new domain representing the intersection of the arguments.  The
intersection is the set of values present in both the arguments.

The returned value may share some structure with the arguments.
@end defun


@defun %domain-union @var{type} @var{domain-a} @var{domain-b}
Return a new domain representing the union of the arguments.  The union
is the set of values present in one and/or the other argument.

The returned value may share some structure with the arguments.
@end defun


@defun %domain-difference @var{type} @var{domain-a} @var{domain-b}
Return a new domain representing the difference of the arguments.  The
difference is the set of values present in one or the other argument.

The returned value may share some structure with the arguments.
@end defun


@defun %domain-complement @var{type} @var{domain} @var{domain-universe}
Return a new domain representing the complement of @var{domain} in the
space defined by @var{domain-universe}.  The returned value holds all
the items from @var{domain-universe} that are not in @var{domain}.

The returned value may share some structure with the arguments.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading List operations


@defun %range-for-each @var{type} @var{proc} @var{range}
Apply @var{proc} to each value in the range.
@end defun


@defun %range-every @var{type} @var{proc} @var{range}
Apply @var{proc} to each value in the range and return true if all the
return values are true.  The application stops at the first @false{}
return value.
@end defun


@defun %range-any @var{type} @var{proc} @var{range}
Apply @var{proc} to each value in the range and return true if at least
one of the returned values is true.  The application stops at the first
true return value.
@end defun


@defun %range-fold @var{type} @var{kons} @var{knil} @var{range}
Fold @var{kons} over the values in the range.
@end defun


@defun %range->list @var{type} @var{range}
Return a list holding all the elements in the range.
@end defun


@defun %domain-for-each @var{type} @var{proc} @var{domain}
Apply @var{proc} to each element of @var{domain}.
@end defun


@defun %domain-every @var{type} @var{proc} @var{domain}
Apply @var{proc} to each value in the domain and return true if all the
return values are true.  The application stops at the first @false{}
return value.
@end defun


@defun %domain-any @var{type} @var{proc} @var{domain}
Apply @var{proc} to each value in the domain and return true if at least
one of the returned values is true.  The application stops at the first
true return value.
@end defun


@defun %domain-fold @var{type} @var{kons} @var{knil} @var{domain}
Fold @var{kons} over the values in the domain.
@end defun


@defun %domain->list @var{type} @var{domain}
Return a list holding all the elements in the domain.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Miscellaneous operations


@defun %range-concatenate @var{type} @var{range-a} @var{range-b}
Concatenate the ranges and return the resulting range.  It does not
matter which range has start less than the other.  It makes sense to
apply this function to ranges that satisfy @func{%range-contiguous?}.

The returned range may share some value with the original ranges.
@end defun

@c end of file
