@node overview
@chapter Overview of Vicare Scheme


Scheme is a statically scoped and properly tail--recursive dialect of
the Lisp programming language invented by Guy Lewis Steele Jr.  and
Gerald Jay Sussman.  It was designed to have an exceptionally clear and
simple semantics and few different ways to form expressions.

The ``Revised^6 Report on the Algorithmic Language Scheme'' (@rnrs{6})
gives a defining description of the programming language Scheme.  The
report is the work of many people in the course of many years; revision
6 was edited by Michael Sperber, R. Kent Dybvig, Matthew Flatt and Anton
Van Straaten.

Ikarus Scheme is an almost @rnrs{6} compliant implementation of the
Scheme programming language; it is the creation of Abdulaziz Ghuloum.

Vicare Scheme is an @rnrs{6} compliant fork of Ikarus Scheme, aiming at
becoming a native compiler producing single threaded programs running on
Intel x86 32-bit processors, with experimental support for 64-bit
machines.  @emph{Vicare} is pronounced the etruscan way.

@menu
* overview original::           Original Ikarus Scheme.
* overview tech::               Technology overview.
* overview resources::          Resources.
* overview system::             System requirements.
* overview install::            Installation and uninstallation.
* overview restrictions::       Implementation restrictions.
* overview extensions::         Implementation extensions.
* overview repl::               The read-eval-print loop.
* overview foreign::            Built in interface to external
                                libraries.
@end menu

@c page
@node overview original
@section Original Ikarus Scheme


The original Ikarus Scheme package is distributed under the terms of the
@gnu{} General Public License (@gpl{}) and can be downloaded from:

@center @url{http://www.ikarus-scheme.org/}

@noindent
or:

@center @url{https://launchpad.net/ikarus}

It was developed by Abdulaziz Ghuloum until the beginning of year 2010;
at that time the Vicare fork was started.

@c page
@node overview tech
@section Technology overview


@value{PRJNAME} Scheme provides the programmer with many advantages:

@table @strong

@item Optimizing code generator
The compiler's backend employs state of the art technologies in code
generation that produce fast, efficient, machine code.  When developing
computationally intensive programs, one is not constrained by using a
slow interpreter.

@item Fast incremental compilation
Every library and script is quickly compiled to native machine code.
When developing large software, one is not constrained by how slow the
batch compiler runs.

@item Robust and fine--tuned standard libraries
The standard libraries are written such that they perform as much error
checking as required to provide a safe and fast runtime environment.

@item Multi--generational garbage collector
The BiBOP based garbage collector used in @value{PRJNAME} allows the runtime
system to expand its memory footprint as needed.  The entire 32-bit
virtual address space could be used and unneeded memory is released back
to the operating system.

@item Supports many operating systems
@value{PRJNAME} runs on @gnu{}+Linux, but it is possible to port it to
the most popular and widely used operating systems for servers and
personal computers.
@end table

@c page
@node overview resources
@section Resources


The @value{PACKAGE} package is distributed under the terms of the @gnu{}
General Public License (@gpl{}) and can be downloaded from:

@center @value{TARBALLURL}

@noindent
the home page of the project is at:

@center @url{http://marcomaggi.github.com/vicare.html}

@noindent
development takes place at:

@center @value{REPOSITORYURL}

Newcomers to Scheme should refer to @url{http://@/www.schemers.org},
which contains listings of tutorials and books that are helpful in
learning the language.

This document is a supplement to the @emph{Revised^6 Report on the
Algorithmic Language Scheme}, found at @url{http://@/www.r6rs.org}.
Kent Dybvig's @emph{The Scheme Programming Language}, Fourth Edition, is
an excellent tutorial and reference for @rnrs{6}.  Some extended
features of @value{PRJNAME} have been inspired by similar features in
@emph{Chez Scheme}; the @emph{Chez Scheme User's Guide} can be found at
the same site.

@c page
@node overview system
@section System requirements


To run @value{PACKAGE}, we will need a system with a relatively recent
Intel @emph{x86} processor; @value{PRJNAME} requires a Unix/Linux
operating system (or emulation), and some prerequisite libraries.

@menu
* overview system hardware::    Hardware requirements.
* overview system software::    Software requirements.
@end menu

@c page
@node overview system hardware
@subsection Hardware requirements


@value{PACKAGE} runs on the IA-32 (@emph{x86}) architecture supporting
@acronym{SSE2} extensions.  This includes the Athlon 64, Sempron 64, and
Turion 64 processors from @acronym{AMD} and the Pentium 4, Xeon,
Celeron, Pentium M, Core, and Core2 processors from Intel.  The system
does not run on Intel Pentium III or earlier processors.

The @value{PRJNAME} compiler generates @acronym{SSE2} instructions to
handle Scheme's @acronym{IEEE} floating point representation
(@emph{flonums}) for inexact numbers.


@c page
@node overview system software
@subsection Software requirements


We will need some additional libraries and tools to build
@value{PACKAGE}.

@table @strong
@item GMP
@value{PRJNAME} uses the @gnu{} Multiple Precision Arithmetic Library
(@gmp{}) for some bignum arithmetic operations.  To build
@value{PRJNAME} from scratch, @gmp{} version 4.2 or better must be
installed along with the required header files.  Pre--built @gmp{}
packages are available for most operating systems.  Alternatively,
@gmp{} can be downloaded from @url{http://@/gmplib.org/}.

The @gmp{} web page points out that @gmp{} has revealed subtle bugs in
many C compilers.  Although the @gmp{} build process includes a
comprehensive self--test (which we absolutely must run if building it
ourselves), we may still prefer to obtain a prebuilt binary version for
our system, if one is available.

@quotation
@strong{NOTE} @value{PRJNAME} runs in 32-bit mode only.  To run it in
64-bit environments, we will have to obtain the 32-bit version of
@gmp{}, or compile it ourselves after adding @code{ABI=32} to its
configuration options.
@end quotation

@item libffi
We will probably need @code{libffi}, a C library that simplifies
run--time calls to arbitrary C functions.  @value{PRJNAME} will operate
without @code{libffi}, but will not be able to call foreign procedures
(those written in C).  @code{libffi} can be downloaded from
@url{http://@/sourceware.org/@/libffi}.

@item GCC
The @gnu{} C Compiler is required to build the @value{PRJNAME}
executable (e.g. the garbage collector, loader, and OS--related
runtime).  @gcc{} versions 4.1 and 4.2 were successfully used to build
@value{PRJNAME}.  It may be possible to build @value{PRJNAME} using
other C compilers.

@item Autoconf and Automake
The @gnu{} Autoconf (version 2.61) and @gnu{} Automake (version 1.10)
tools are required if one wishes to modify the @value{PRJNAME} source
base.  They are not required to build the official release of
@value{PRJNAME}.

Prebuilt packages for these tools have been created for most Unix/Linux
systems; if we prefer, we can download the source code from
@url{http://@/www.gnu.org/@/software/@/autoconf} and
@url{http://@/www.gnu.org/@/software/@/automake} respectively, and build
them ourselves.

@item Texinfo
This document is provided in Texinfo format.  Texinfo is available as an
installable package for most Unix/Linux systems.  Alternatively, we can
download the source package
@url{http://@/www.gnu.org/@/software/@/texinfo}.
@end table

@c page
@node overview install
@section Installation and uninstallation


@cindex Installing @value{PRJNAME}
@cindex Uninstalling @value{PRJNAME}
@cindex Disinstalling @value{PRJNAME}
@cindex @value{PRJNAME}, installing
@cindex @value{PRJNAME}, uninstalling
@cindex @value{PRJNAME}, disinstalling


There are two ways to install @value{PACKAGE} on our system: we can
either install a prebuilt package, if one is available for our operating
system, or we can build it from source.  There are two reasons to prefer
the ``build from source'' approach: first, not all Unix/Linux package
repositories have an @value{PACKAGE} package at all; second, prebuilt
packages often lag current revisions to the system by a considerable
amount.  Therefore, the version we install from a package repository
might not even have some of the features documented in this manual.

We will assume in this section that we are building @value{PACKAGE}
ourselves.  @value{PRJNAME} uses the standard installation method found
in most other Unix software.  Thus we will follow the usual steps.

@enumerate
@item
Download the software.

@item
Set configuration options.

@item
Build and install
@end enumerate

@menu
* overview install quick::              Quick installation guide.
* overview install prerequisites::      Installing the prerequisites.
* overview install details::            Installation details.
* overview install uninstall::          Uninstalling @value{PRJNAME}.
@end menu

@c page
@node overview install quick
@subsection Quick installation guide


If familiar with installing Unix software on our system, then all we
need to know is that @value{PRJNAME} uses the standard installation
method found in most other Unix software.  Simply run the following
commands from the shell:

@example
$ tar -xvzf vicare-n.n.n.tar.gz
$ cd vicare-n.n.n
$ ./configure [--prefix=path] [CFLAGS=-I/dir] [LDFLAGS=-L/dir]
$ make
$ make install
@end example

@noindent
@ref{overview install details} for how to enable the foreign functions
interface.

After installation, under the directory
@code{$libexecdir/vicare-scheme}, scripts with names like
@file{compile-all.sps} can be executed to precompile the installed
libraries; for example:

@example
$ sudo vicare --compile-dependencies \
   /usr/local/libexec/vicare-scheme/compile-all.sps
@end example

To uninstall @value{PACKAGE}, use the following steps:

@example
$ cd path/to/vicare-n.n.n
$ make uninstall
@end example

The rest of this section gives more detail on building, installing, and
uninstalling @value{PACKAGE}.

@c page
@node overview install prerequisites
@subsection Installing the prerequisites


The first step is to ensure that we have @gmp{} and Libffi installed; we
should generally use our system's package manager for these.  Note where
the include (@code{.h}) and library (@code{.a}) files for each of these
packages are installed.  (Typically this will be in either
@file{/usr/@/include} and @file{/usr/@/lib}, or
@file{/usr/@/local/@/include} and @file{/usr/@/local/@/lib}.)

If we choose to download these as source and build them ourselves, refer
to the installation instructions found in each package.  If we are
installing @gmp{} from source, it is @emph{essential} that we run the
self--tests after building, and verify that no errors were detected.  We
do this by issuing the command @command{make check}; see the
documentation for details.

@c page
@node overview install details
@subsection Installation details


We have two choices for downloading the @value{PACKAGE} source: we can
either download a distribution from:

@center @value{TARBALLURL}

@noindent
or we can checkout a revision from the GitHub repository:

@center @value{REPOSITORYURL}

@itemize
@item
@value{PACKAGE} source distributions are tarballs named
@file{vicare-@-@var{@var{n.n.n}}.tar.gz}, where @file{@var{n.n.n}} is a
3--component ID indicating the current revision.

If we downloaded a distribution, unpack it.  From the shell prompt:

@example
$ tar -xvzf vicare-@var{n.n.n}.tar.gz
@end example

@noindent
this creates the base directory @file{vicare-@var{n.n.n}}.

@item
If we downloaded a bleeding--edge snapshot, no unpacking is needed.
@end itemize

We configure the build system by running the @command{configure} script
located in the base directory.  To do this, type the following commands:

@example
$ cd vicare-@var{n.n.n}
$ ./configure
checking build system type... i386-apple-darwin8.10.1
checking host system type... i386-apple-darwin8.10.1
...
configure: creating ./config.status
config.status: creating Makefile
config.status: creating src/Makefile
config.status: creating scheme/Makefile
config.status: creating doc/Makefile
config.status: executing depfiles commands
@end example

This configures the system to be built then installed in the
system--wide location (binaries are normally installed in
@file{/usr/@/local/@/bin}).  To install it in another location (e.g. in
your home directory), provide a @option{--prefix} location to
@command{configure} as follows:

@example
$ ./configure --prefix=/opt/sw
@end example

@noindent
this will install the executable in @file{/opt/@/sw/@/bin}, libraries in
@file{/opt/@/sw/@/lib/@/ikarus}, and documentation in
@file{/opt/@/sw/@/share/@/doc/@/ikarus}.

To install @value{PACKAGE} for personal use (thus not requiring root
permissions to install), specify @code{--prefix=$HOME/local}, which
installs everything in a @file{local} directory of our home directory.

@command{configure} allows us to fine--tune where things are installed,
though this is rarely necessary or useful.  Do
@code{./configure@tie{}--help} for a full list of options.

The most common @command{configure} options are as follows.

@table @asis
@item @option{--prefix}
Specify the location in the file system where @value{PACKAGE} will be
installed.

@item @option{--enable-ffi}
Include @value{PACKAGE}'s Foreign Function Interface, so that
@value{PRJNAME} code can invoke C code, and vice versa; requires Libffi.

@item @option{--disable-arguments-validation}
Disable arguments validation for the functions in Vicare's boot image;
use with care: an invalid argument will cause undefined behaviour (most
likely a process crash).

@cindex @env{VICARE_ARGUMENTS_VALIDATION} environment variable
@cindex Environment variable @env{VICARE_ARGUMENTS_VALIDATION}
This setting can be overridden by setting the environment variable
@env{VICARE_ARGUMENTS_VALIDATION}; @ref{args config} for details.

@item @env{CFLAGS}
Specify options to be used while compiling @value{PRJNAME}'s C code.

@item @env{CPPFLAGS}
Specify options to be used while preprocessing @value{PRJNAME}'s C code.

@item @env{LDFLAGS}
Specify options to be used while linking @value{PRJNAME}.
@end table

@command{configure} will fail if it cannot find the location where
@gmp{} is installed.  The script will also fail if we have specified
@option{--enable-ffi} and it can't find Libffi.  If running
@command{configure} fails to locate either of these libraries, we will
need to provide their locations.  Use the @env{CPPFLAGS} and
@env{LDFLAGS} options to specify the locations of the header and library
files.

For example, assume that we have installed @gmp{} and Libffi in
subdirectories of @file{/opt/sw}, and we wish to support foreign
functions.@footnote{The @command{configure} command shown here is very
imposing, and anyone can easily make mistakes.  In general, it's a good
idea to create a shell script that has the sequence of
@command{configure} and @command{make} commands needed to configure,
build, and install a package; this not only allows us to re--install
easily, but also gives us a concrete indication of what options we used
to build the software the last time.  Of course, we should put this
script somewhere other than in the actual @value{PRJNAME} software
directory!}

@example
./configure                                                  \
  --prefix=$HOME/local                                       \
  --enable-ffi                                               \
  CPPFLAGS="-I/opt/sw/gmp/include -I/opt/sw/libffi/include"  \
  LDFLAGS="-L/opt/sw/gmp/lib -L/opt/sw/libffi/lib"
@end example

We can use the @env{CFLAGS} and @env{LDFLAGS} variables to select more
specialized compilation and linking options; refer to the compiler
documentation for more details.

We can now build the system by running the command @command{make}, with
no arguments; this performs two tasks:

@enumerate
@item
It builds the @command{vicare} executable from the C files located in
the @file{src} directory.

@item
It uses the @command{vicare} executable and the pre--built
@file{ikarus.boot.orig} boot file to rebuild the Scheme boot image file
@file{vicare.boot} from the Scheme sources located in the @file{scheme}
directory.
@end enumerate

The final stage is to install @value{PRJNAME} via the command
@command{make install}.  If we're installing @value{PRJNAME} in a
system--wide location, we probably need to have administrator privileges
(use the @command{sudo} or @command{su} commands); if that's not
feasible, then we need to reconfigure to install within a directory tree
under our home directory.

Finally, try a small session, to verify that everything installed
properly.

@example
$ vicare
Vicare Scheme version 0.1d0+ \
  (revision master/d844c006eb9ada1a047be3893d0dd40f8ae6204a, \
  build 2010-05-02)
Copyright (c) 2006-2010 Abdulaziz Ghuloum and contributors

> (display "hello, world!\n")
hello, world!
> (define twice (lambda (f) (lambda (x) (f (f x)))))
> ((twice add1) 3)
5
@end example

If we get the first @code{>} prompt, then @value{PRJNAME} was
successfully installed on the system.  We may need to update the
@env{PATH} variable in environment to contain the directory in which the
@command{vicare} executable was installed.

Finally, do @command{make clean} to get rid of executables, object
files, and other build products in the @file{vicare-@var{n.n.n}}
directory.  Do not delete the directory itself: it will be needed if we
ever want to uninstall @value{PRJNAME}.

After installation, under the directory
@code{$libexecdir/vicare-scheme}, scripts with names like
@file{compile-all.sps} can be executed to precompile the installed
libraries; for example:

@example
$ sudo vicare --compile-dependencies \
   /usr/local/libexec/vicare-scheme/compile-all.sps
@end example

@c page
@node overview install uninstall
@subsection Uninstalling @value{PRJNAME}


@cindex @value{PRJNAME}, uninstalling
@cindex @value{PRJNAME}, disinstalling
@cindex Disinstalling @value{PRJNAME}
@cindex Uninstalling @value{PRJNAME}


To uninstall @value{PACKAGE}, go to the directory we built
@value{PRJNAME} in (not the directory where you installed it), and do
@command{make uninstall}.

@example
$ cd path/to/vicare-@var{n.n.n}
$ make uninstall
@end example

@c page
@node overview restrictions
@section Implementation restrictions


Here is a list of implementation constraints which may be non--compliant
with @rnrs{6}.

@enumerate
@item
Scheme strings can hold at most @code{(greatest-fixnum)} characters; the
length of a string and all the valid indexes into strings are
representable as fixnums.

@item
Scheme bytevectors can hold at most @code{(greatest-fixnum)} bytes; the
length of a bytevector and all the valid indexes into bytevectors are
representable as fixnums.

@item
The last argument to @func{apply} can be a list of at most @math{8192}
values.  This is an artificially set limit to avoid problems with huge
values (it could be greater than this).  As comparison: LispWorks for
Unix sets this value to 300, LispWorks for Windows and LispWorks for
Linux set this value to 255 (last verified from its online documenattion
in November, 2011).

@item
@rnrs{6} mandates that illegal references to bindings established by
@func{letrec} and @func{letrec*} are detected at run time and cause an
assertion violation to be raised.  @value{PRJNAME} detects them at
compile time, so some fully @rnrs{6}--compliant code will not work under
@value{PRJNAME}.

For example, the following program will run under a @rnrs{6}--compliant
implementation:

@example
(import (rnrs))
(letrec ((x (if (eq? (cons 1 2)
                     (cons 1 2))
                x
              1)))
  x)
@end example

@noindent
because the form @code{x} in reference position in the right-hand side
of the binding is never evaluated; under @value{PRJNAME} this code will
rather raise a syntax violation at compile time.

@item
The following functions accept only non--negative fixnums as offset
argument:

@example
bitwise-arithmetic-shift-left
bitwise-arithmetic-shift-right
@end example

@item
The function @func{bitwise-arithmetic-shift} accepts only fixnums as
offset argument.
@end enumerate

@c page
@node overview extensions
@section Implementation extensions


Here is a list of implementation extensions which may be non--compliant
with @rnrs{6}.

@enumerate
@item
According to @rnrs{6}: if the parent of a record type has a custom
protocol function, the record type itself must have a custom protocol
function; that is:

@example
(import (rnrs))

(define-record-type alpha
  (fields a)
  (protocol (lambda (A) ---)))

;; this is good
(define-record-type beta
  (parent alpha)
  (fields b)
  (protocol (lambda (A B) ---)))

;; this is bad according to R6RS!!!
(define-record-type gamma
  (parent alpha)
  (fields b))
@end example

This restriction is violated by @value{PRJNAME}, which allows the
following:

@example
(import (rnrs))

(define-record-type alpha
  (fields a)
  (protocol (lambda (A) ---)))

;; this is good in Vicare!!!
(define-record-type beta
  (parent alpha)
  (fields b))
@end example

@noindent
@value{PRJNAME} just expects the parent protocol function to have the
same interface of a default protocol function.

@item
The syntax @func{define-record-type} automatically generates unsafe
field accessor and mutator syntaxes; in the following example:

@example
(define-record-type color
  (fields (mutable red)
          (mutable green)
          (mutable blue)))
@end example

@noindent
in addition to the safe accessor and mutator definitions for:

@example
color-red           color-red-set!
color-green         color-green-set!
color-blue          color-blue-set!
@end example

@noindent
unsafe accessors and mutator definitions for:

@example
$color-red          $color-red-set!
$color-green        $color-green-set!
$color-blue         $color-blue-set!
@end example

@noindent
are generated with code like:

@example
(define-syntax $color-red
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((_ x)
     ($struct-ref x 0))))

(define-syntax $color-red-set!
  (syntax-rules ()
    ((_ x v)
     ($struct-set! x 0 v))))
@end example

Notice that the name of the unsafe accessors and mutators is always
built from the field name, @strong{not} from the custom names given in
the definition; for example:

@example
(import (rnrs))

(define-record-type color
  (fields (mutable red   the-red   set-the-red!)
          (mutable green the-green set-the-green!)
          (mutable blue  the-blue  set-the-blue!)))

(define X
  (make-color 1 2 3))

(define Y
  (make-color 1 2 3))

(set-the-red!   X 10)
(set-the-green! X 20)
(set-the-blue!  X 30)
(list (the-red   X)
      (the-green X)
      (the-blue  X)))
@result{} (10 20 30)

($color-red-set!   Y 10)
($color-green-set! Y 20)
($color-blue-set!  Y 30)
(list ($color-red   Y)
      ($color-green Y)
      ($color-blue  Y)))
@result{} (10 20 30)
@end example
@end enumerate

@c page
@node overview repl
@section The read-eval-print loop


Scheme implementations compliant with @rnrs{6} live in a somewhat uneasy
tension with a standard Scheme @acronym{REPL} (read--eval--print loop),
which the Report effectively does not define.

In particular, the effect of reimporting a module, as you might do when
reloading and rerunning a program, isn't well--defined by @rnrs{6}.
This is a limitation caused by the particular design choices made in
@rnrs{6}.

Accordingly, the interactive mode is intended for quick experimenting
with the built in features.  It is intended neither for developing
applications nor for writing any substantial piece of code.

@c page
@node overview foreign
@section Built in interface to external libraries


@value{PRJNAME} comes with some interface to external libraries built
into the @value{EXECUTABLE} C language executable itself; this is done
only for some particular libraries which especially benefit from a
dedicated interface inconvenient to implement with the @ffi{}.  At the
Scheme level the @api{} is exported by libraries @strong{not} included
in @value{PRJNAME}'s boot image.

Such interfaces are excluded by default, they must be explicitly
requested at installation--time with command line options for the
@command{configure} script.

@menu
* overview foreign readline::   Interface to @gnu{} Readline.
* overview foreign cre2::       Interface to @cretwo{}.
@end menu

@c page
@node overview foreign readline
@subsection Interface to @gnu{} Readline


@gnu{} Readline is a library implementing advanced command line editing
features for programs providing a @repl{} interface.  When given the
@option{--with-readline} configuration option, the @command{configure}
script will search for @gnu{} Readline or a compatible library and, if
found, the interface will be enabled.  @ref{iklib readline} for the
@api{} documentation.

The home page of @gnu{} Readline is at:

@center @url{http://www.gnu.org/software/readline/}

@noindent
a compatible alternative is Editline:

@center @url{http://www.s11n.net/editline/}

@noindent
and another possible replacement is Libedit:

@center @url{http://sourceforge.net/projects/libedit/}

@c page
@node overview foreign cre2
@subsection Interface to @cretwo{}


@cretwo{} is a C language wrapper for the @retwo{} library, which is
implemented in C++.  @retwo{} is a fast, safe, thread--friendly
alternative to backtracking regular expression engines like those used
in PCRE, Perl, and Python; it is a Google project found at:

@center @url{http://code.google.com/p/re2/}

@noindent
while @cretwo{} is available at:

@center @url{http://github.com/marcomaggi/cre2/}

@value{PRJNAME} interface to @cretwo{} can be included at package
configuration time by giving the @option{--with-cre2} option to the
@command{configure} script.  @ref{cre2} for the @api{} documentation.

@c end of file
