@node random
@chapter Sources of random bits


@cindex @library{vicare crypto randomisations}, library
@cindex Library @library{vicare crypto randomisations}


The library @library{vicare crypto randomisations} provides an @api{} to
access sources of random and pseudo--random bits, or ``randomness
sources'' for brevity.  Other, auxiliary libraries provide access to
miscellaneous randomness generators and utilities.

@menu
* random intro::                Introduction.
* random prng::                 Notes on the algorithms.
* random numbers::              Simple random numbers.
* random source::               Randomness sources.
* random mrg32k3a::             L'Ecuyer's MRG32k3a generator
* random device::               Device--based generator.
* random utils::                Utilities.
* random generators::           Auxiliary generators.
* random dist::                 Random numbers from known distributions.
@end menu

@c page
@node random intro
@section Introduction


There are three different ways to use the interface, with varying
demands on the quality of the source and the amount of control over the
production process:

@itemize
@item
The ``no fuss'' interface specifies that @code{(random-integer U)}
produces the next random integer number @math{X} such that @math{0 <= X
< U} and @func{(random-real)} produces the next random real number
@math{X} such that @math{0 < X < 1}.  Details about how these random
values are produced may not be very relevant, as long as they appear to
be sufficiently random.

@item
For simulation purposes, on the contrary, it is usually necessary to
know that the numbers are produced deterministically by a pseudo--random
number generator of high quality and to have explicit access to its
state.  In addition, one might want to use several independent sources
of random numbers at the same time and it can be useful to have some
simple form of randomization.

@item
For security applications a serious form of true randomization is
essential, in the sense that it is difficult for an adversary to exploit
or introduce imperfections into the distribution of random bits.
Moreover, the linear complexity of the stream of random bits is more
important than its statistical properties.  In these applications, an
entropy source (producing truly random bits at a low rate) can be used
to randomize a pseudo random number generator to increase the rate of
available bits.
@end itemize

Once randomness sources provide the infrastructure to obtain random
bits, these can be used to construct other random deviates.  Most
important are floating point numbers of various distributions and random
discrete structures, such as permutations or graphs.

@c page
@node random prng
@section Notes on the algorithms


Pseudo--random number generators (@acronym{PRNG}s) are algorithms that
can automatically create long sequences of numbers (for example,
millions of numbers) with good random properties; eventually the
sequence repeats itself or memory usage grows without
bound@footnote{Wikipedia contributors, ``Random number generation,''
Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia,
@url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/@/Random_number_generator} (accessed
June 28, 2009).}.

We examine some notes on @acronym{PRNG}s with the purpose of gaining
basic understanding of the code, and to reverese engineer the basic
steps of source code available on the Internet.  This section is meant
to help people new to the @acronym{PRNG} algorithms.

@menu
* random prng lcg::             Linear congruential generators.
* random prng mwc::             Multiply with carry.
* random prng csprng::          Cryptographically secure @acronym{PRNG}.
* random prng integers::        Generating integers in a specified range.
* random prng reals::           Generating real numbers.
@end menu

@c page
@node random prng lcg
@subsection Linear congruential generators


One of the most common @acronym{PRNG} is the @dfn{linear congruential
generator} (@acronym{LCG}), which uses the recurrence:

@example
N' = (a N + b) mod M      0 <= N', N < M
@end example

@noindent
to generate a new integer number @math{N'} from an initial state
@math{N}, @math{a} and @math{b} being known, fixed, recursion
coefficients.  The maximum number of integers the formula can produce is
the modulus @math{M}.

To avoid certain non--random properties of a single linear congruential
generator, several such generators with slightly different values of the
multiplier coeffient are typically used in parallel, with a ``master''
generator that selects among them.

The most efficient LCGs have an @math{M} equal to a power of @math{2},
most often @math{2^{32}} or @math{2^{64}}, because this allows the
modulus operation to be computed by merely truncating all but the
rightmost @math{32} or @math{64} bits@footnote{Wikipedia contributors,
"Linear congruential generator," Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia,
@url{}http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linear_congruential_generator
(accessed May 24, 2009).}.

@acronym{LCG}s should not be used for applications where high-quality
randomness is critical.  For example, they are not suitable for a Monte
Carlo simulation or for cryptographic applications.  A further problem
of @acronym{LCG}s is that the lower--order bits of the generated
sequence have a far shorter period than the sequence as a whole if
@math{M} is set to a power of @math{2}.

@c page
@node random prng mwc
@subsection Multiply with carry


Multiply--with--carry (@acronym{MWC}) is a method invented by George
Marsaglia for generating sequences of pseudo--random integers based on
an initial set of from two to many thousands of randomly chosen seed
values@footnote{Wikipedia contributors, ``Multiply--with--carry,''
Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia,
@url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multiply-with-carry} (accessed May 8,
2009).}.

The main advantage of the @acronym{MWC} method is that it invokes simple
computer integer arithmetic and leads to very fast generation of
sequences of pseudo--random numbers with immense periods, ranging from
around @math{260} to @math{22e6}.  As with most @acronym{PRNG}s, the
resulting sequences are functions of the randomly chosen seed values,
but @acronym{MWC} generators seem to behave as well as, and often better
than, others in tests of randomness.

A @acronym{MWC} sequence is based on arithmetic modulo @math{M}, usually
@math{2^{32}}, because arithmetic modulo that @math{M} is automatic in
most computers, but sometimes a modulo such as @math{32^2 - 1} is used,
because arithmetic for modulus @math{2^{32} - 1} requires only a simple
adjustment from that for @math{2^{32}}, and theory for @acronym{MWC}
sequences based on modulus @math{2^{32}} has some nagging difficulties
that use of @math{2^{32} - 1} avoids.

Complementary--multiply--with--carry generators (@acronym{CMWC}) are a
slightly modified form of @acronym{MWC} giving better results.  A basic
formulation of the algorithm uses the recurrence:

@example
N' = (M - 1) - (a * N + C) mod M    0 <= N < M

           a * N + C
C' = floor ---------                     C < a
               M
@end example

@noindent
to generate a new number @math{N'} and a new carry @math{C'} from an
initial state @math{N} and an initial carry @math{C}, @math{a} being the
recursion coefficient and @math{M} being the modulo.

Better formulations adopt a ``lag'' of @math{r} values: Chosen a
positive integer @math{r}, an initial carry @math{C} and a vector
@math{[N(1), N(2), ..., N(r)]} of initial seed values, the new number
@math{N'} and the new carry @math{C'} are computed using the seed
@math{N(r)} as:

@example
N' = (M - 1) - (a * N(r) + C) mod M

           a * N(r) + C
C' = floor ------------
                M
@end example

@noindent
then the seed vector is right--shifted purging @math{N(r)}:

@example
N(r)   = N(r-1)
N(r-1) = N(r-2)
...
N(2)   = N(1)
N(1)   = N'
@end example

@c page
@node random prng csprng
@subsection Cryptographically secure @acronym{PRNG}


A cryptographically secure pseudo--random number generator
(@acronym{CSPRNG}) is a @acronym{PRNG} with properties that make it
suitable for use in cryptography.  The requirements of an ordinary
@acronym{PRNG} are also satisfied by a @acronym{CSPRNG}, but the reverse
is not true.

@acronym{CSPRNG} requirements fall into two groups: that they pass
statistical randomness tests; that they hold up well under serious
attacks, even when part of their initial or running state becomes
available to an attacker@footnote{Wikipedia contributors,
``Cryptographically secure pseudorandom number generator,'' Wikipedia,
The Free Encyclopedia, @url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/@/
Cryptographically@/_secure@/_pseudo-random@/_number_generator} (accessed
June 6, 2009).}.

@c page
@node random prng integers
@subsection Generating integers in a specified range


In applications using a randomness source, it happens to need a
pseudo--random integer @math{X} in a given range @math{0 <= X < U},
while the @acronym{PRNG} generates a pseudo--random integer @math{N} in
the range @math{0 <= N < M}.  In other words: We need a sample from the
range @math{0 <= X < U} having uniform probability distribution, by
means of a sample from the range @math{0 <= N < M} having a uniform
probability distribution.

We distinguish the two cases @math{U <= M} and @math{M < U}, because
when @math{U <= M} there are more integers in the range @math{0 <= N <
M} than in the range @math{0 <= X < U}, while when @math{M < U} it is
the other way around.

@itemize
@item
When @math{U <= M}, we have to understand that doing a simple @math{N
mod U} is incorrect, because it breaks uniform distribution of the
result in the range @math{0 <= X < U}.  We can use the following
formulation which gives uniformly distributed results:

@example
Q  = floor(M / U)
QU = Q * U

loop:
  N = <generate the next integer>
  if (N < QU)
  then X = floor(N / Q)
  else goto loop
@end example

@noindent
notice that @math{QU = Q * U <= M}; also notice that it is statistically
possible that the algorithm loops forever, but we can hope that it finds
a solution in a reasonable short time.  It works like this:

@enumerate
@item
Conceptually partition the range @math{0 <= N < QU} in @math{U}
intervals each of length @math{Q}, indexed by @math{X} in the range
@math{0 <= X < U}.

@item
Generate an integer @math{N} and discard it if @math{QU <= N}.

@item
If @math{N} is in the range @math{0 <= N < QU}, then it is also in a
range @math{X * Q < N < (X+1) * Q}.  @math{X} is the result.
@end enumerate

@item
When @math{M < U}, we have to generate pseudo--random integers @math{N'}
uniformly distributed in a range @math{0 <= N' < M'}, with @math{M < U
<= M'}.  We can do it by computing the following formula, which is a
polynomial in @math{M} and a linear combination with positive
coefficients in @math{N(i)} with @math{0 <= i < k}:

@example
N' = N0 + M * N1 + M^2 * N2 + ... +
   + ... + M^(k-2) * N(k-2) + M^(k-1) * N(k-1)
@end example

@noindent
where @math{N0}, @math{N1}, ..., @math{N(k-1)} are all generated
integers in the range @math{0 <= N(i) < M}.  The maximum value, that is
@math{M' - 1}, is realised when every @math{N(i)} equals @math{M - 1}:

@example
M' - 1 = (M - 1) + M * (M - 1) + M^2 * (M - 1) + ... +
       + ... + M^(k-2) * (M - 1) + M^(k-1) * (M - 1)
       = (M - 1) * [1 + M + M^2 + ... + M^(k-2) + M^(k-1)]
       = (M - 1) * (1 - M^k)/(1 - M)
       = (M - 1) * (M^k - 1)/(M - 1)
       = M^k - 1
@end example

@noindent
which implies @math{M^k = M'}.  So by selecting @math{k} such that
@math{U <= M^k} we are sure that @math{N'} will be in a suitable range.

Computing this polinomial/combination is like expressing the big
pseudo--random integer @math{N'} in base @math{M} where @math{N(i)} are
the digits.  Each possible @math{N'} is uniquely associated to a
@math{k}--tuple of integers @math{N(i)}.  Being the probability of
@math{N(i)} uniformly distributed, each possible @math{k}--tuple has
uniform probability in the set of all the possible @math{k}--tuples.  So
also the probability of @math{N'} is uniformly distributed in the range
@math{0 <= N' < M^k}.

Then we proceed like we did before for @math{U <= M}:

@example
Q  = floor(M' / U)
QU = Q * U

loop:
  N' = <compute the next polynomial>
  if (N' < QU)
  then X = floor(N' / Q)
  else goto loop
@end example
@end itemize

@c page
@node random prng reals
@subsection Generating real numbers


We want a sample @math{X} from the discrete range of representable
flonums in @math{0 <= X < 1} with a distribution that mimics the uniform
distribution of real numbers @math{R} in the continuous range @math{0 <
R < 1}.

Knowing that the integers @math{N} generated by a @acronym{PRNG} are
uniformly distributed in the range @math{0 <= N < M}, a pseudo--random
flonum @math{X} in the range @math{0 < X < 1} can be computed from a
generated @math{N} with the following normalisation formula:

@example
X = (1 + N) / (1 + M)
@end example

@noindent
notice that:

@example
N = 0        =>  X = 1 / (1 + M) > 0
N = (M - 1)  =>  X = M / (1 + M) < 1
@end example

@noindent
sometimes this is enough, but we have to notice that: There may be more
representable flonums in @math{0 < X < 1} than exact fractions like
@math{(1 + N) / (1 + M)}.

The following program prints the generated inexact fractions for the
very simple case @math{M = 5}, it prints also the intervals between two
adjacent fractions:

@example
(import (rnrs)
  (vicare lists))

(define M 5)
(fold-left (lambda (prev-X X)
             (write (list X (- X prev-X)))
             (newline)
             X)
           0.0
           (map (lambda (N)
                  (inexact (/ (+ 1 N) (+ 1 M))))
             (list-tabulate M values)))
@print{} (0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666)
@print{} (0.3333333333333333  0.16666666666666666)
@print{} (0.5                 0.16666666666666669)
@print{} (0.6666666666666666  0.16666666666666663)
@print{} (0.8333333333333334  0.16666666666666674)
@end example

@noindent
so the generated flonums are in ``units'' of approximately @math{1/6 =
0.166666666666666}; we can compute this unit with @math{1 / (1 + M)}.

It is useful to be able to generate flonums in smaller units: We can do
it by generating a pseudo--random integer @math{N'} uniformly
distributed in a range larger than @math{0 <= N < M}.  We use the same
method previously outlined for large integers generation.  @ref{random
prng integers, Generating integers in a specified range}

So, we select a value for the desired unit, then we find @math{M'} such
that:

@example
1 / (1 + M') <= unit
=>  1 + M' >= 1 / unit
=>  M' >= (1 / unit) - 1
=>  1  >= (1 / unit) - 1 / M'
@end example

@noindent
then we generate a big pseudo--random integer @math{N'} in the range
@math{0 <= N' < M'} and normalise it with:

@example
X = (1 + N') / (1 + M')
@end example

@c page
@node random numbers
@section Simple random numbers


@defvr {Constant} default-random-source
A randomness source built by @func{make-random-source/mrg32k3a}, making
use of Pierre L'Ecuyer's MRG32k3a generator.  @ref{random mrg32k3a,
L'Ecuyer's MRG32k3a generator}.
@end defvr


@defun random-integer @var{n}
Use @code{default-random-source} to generate the next integer @math{X}
in the range @math{0 <= X < U}, where @var{U} is a positive integer.
Subsequent results of this procedure are independent, uniformly
distributed over the range @math{0 <= X < U}.
@end defun


@defun random-real
Use @code{default-random-source} to generate the next real number
@math{X} in the range @math{0 < X < 1}.  @math{X=0} and @math{X=1} are
excluded in order to allow @math{\log(X)} and @math{\log(1-X)} without
the danger of a numerical exception.  Subsequent results of this
procedure are independent, uniformly distributed in the range @math{0 <
X < 1}.
@end defun

@c page
@node random source
@section Randomness sources


@deffn Parameter random-source-maker
Hold a procedure that can be used to generate a new randomness source.
It is initialised to @func{make-random-source/mrg32k3a}.  For example,
it can be used as:

@example
(define source  ((random-source-maker)))
(define integer (random-source-integer-maker source))
(display (integer))
@print{} <a random integer>
@end example

@noindent
and as:

@example
(parameterise ((random-source-maker
                  make-random-source/device))
  (let* ((source  ((random-source-maker)))
         (integer (random-source-integer-maker source)))
    (display (integer))))
@print{} <a random integer>
@end example
@end deffn


@defun random-source? @var{obj}
Test if @var{obj} is a randomness source.  Objects of type randomness
source are distinct from all other types of objects.
@end defun


@defun random-source-state-ref @var{source}
@defunx random-source-state-set! @var{source} @var{state}
Get and set the current state of @var{source}.  The purpose of these
functions is to allow saving and restoring the state between sessions
(for example, save the state to a file and reload it later).

The state value is always a vector whose first element is a symbol
describing the generator.  The other elements of the vector depend on
the kind of generator: Refer to generator's documentation for their
format.
@end defun


@defun random-source-seed! @var{source} @var{integers-maker}
Reseed @var{source} to a new state.  @var{integers-maker} must be a a
generator of random integer numbers, like the ones returned by
@func{random-source-integers-maker}.  Notice that many random sources
require @var{integer-makers} to return integers representable with
@math{32} bits.
@end defun


@defun random-source-required-seed-values @var{source}
When @func{random-source-seed!} is used to reseed a @var{source}, some
generator will invoke @var{integers-maker} a fixed and known number of
times, other generators will invoke it a configurable number of times,
other generators will invoke it until it first returns @false{}, other
generators will invoke it until the returned numbers have some desired
property.

This function returns the number of times @var{integers-maker} will be
called; if the return value is @false{}: @var{integers-maker} will be
invoked until it first returns @false{}; if the return value is
infinity: @var{integers-maker} will be invoked until it returns numbers
with some desired property.
@end defun


@defun random-source-jumpahead! @var{source} @var{number-of-steps}
Move ahead @var{number-of-steps} randomness @var{source}'s state.  What
this means exactly depends on the type of @var{source}.
@end defun


The following procedures return a closure @var{rand} to generate
pseudo--random integers and real numbers using a randomness
@var{source}.  If an application obtains and uses several @var{rand}
procedures for the same randomness @var{source}, a call to any of these
procedures advances the state of @var{source}.  Hence, the procedures do
not produce the same sequence of random integers each, but rather share
a state.


@defun random-source-integers-maker @var{source}
Return a procedure @var{rand} to generate random integers using
@var{source}.  @var{rand} takes a single argument @var{U}, which must be
a positive integer, and returns the next uniformly distributed random
integer @math{X} in the interval @math{0 <= X < U} by advancing the
state of @var{source}.
@end defun


@defun random-source-reals-maker @var{source}
@defunx random-source-reals-maker @var{source} @var{unit}
Return a procedure @var{rand} which, when invoked with no arguments,
generates random real numbers @math{X} in the range @code{0 < X < 1}
using @var{source}.  @math{X=0} and @math{X=1} are excluded in order to
allow @math{\log(X)} and @math{\log(1-X)} without the danger of a
numerical exception.

The optional parameter @var{unit} determines the quantization of the
output; to have effect, @var{unit} must be a number such that @code{0 <
unit < 1}, if @var{unit} is greater than, or equal to, @math{1} the
generated numbers will have the default unit.  The numbers created by
@var{rand} are spaced by at most @var{unit}.  @ref{random prng reals,
Generating real numbers}, for details.
@end defun

@c page
@node random mrg32k3a
@section L'Ecuyer's MRG32k3a generator


The default randomness source of @library{vicare crypto randomisations}
is Pierre L'Ecuyer's MRG32k3a generator:

@quotation
P. L'Ecuyer.  ``Good Parameter Sets for Combined Multiple Recursive
Random Number Generators'', Shorter version in Operations Research, 47,
1 (1999), 159--164.

P. L'Ecuyer, R. Simard, E. J. Chen, W. D. Kelton. ``An Object--Oriented
Random--Number Package With Many Long Streams and Substreams''.  2001.
To appear in Operations Research.
@end quotation


@defun make-random-source/mrg32k3a
Create and return a new randomness source using MRG32k3a, representing a
deterministic stream of random bits.  Each returned randomness source
generates the same stream of values, unless the state is modified with
@func{random-source-seed!}.

The state returned by @func{random-source-state-ref} is a Scheme vector
of length 7, whose first value is the symbol
@code{random-source-state/mrg32k3a}.  All the other values in the vector
are positive integers.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading The algorithm

The MRG32k3a generator produces values @math{N} in the range @math{0 <=
N < 2^{32} - 209}.  A new pseudo--random number @math{N} is generated
with the following computation starting from the state vectors
@math{[A1, A2, A3]} and @math{[B1, B2, B3]}:

@example
M1 = 4294967087 = 2^32 - 209
M2 = 4294944443 = 2^32 - 22853

c2 =  1403580
c3 =  -810728
d1 =   527612
d3 = -1370589

A0 = (          c2 * A2 + c3 * A3) mod M1
B0 = (d1 * B1 +           d3 * B3) mod M2

; right-shift A, purging the old A3
A3 = A2
A2 = A1
A1 = A0

; right-shift B, purging the old B3
B3 = B2
B2 = B1
B1 = B0

N = (A0 - B0) mod M1
@end example

@noindent
notice that @math{M1} and @math{M2} are two prime numbers just below
@math{2^{32}}; @math{c2}, @math{c3}, @math{d1} and @math{d3} are called
@dfn{recursion coefficients}.  The @library{vicare crypto
randomisations} library defines the initial state vectors as:

@example
A1 = 1062452522
A2 = 2961816100
A3 =  342112271

B1 = 2854655037
B2 = 3321940838
B3 = 3542344109
@end example

@c page
@node random device
@section Device--based random numbers


In Unix--like operating systems, @file{/dev/random} is a special file
that serves as a true random number generator or as a pseudorandom
number generator.  It allows access to environmental noise collected
from device drivers and other sources.  Not all operating systems
implement the same semantics for @file{/dev/random}@footnote{See
@url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Urandom}, last verified Fri Jun 26,
2009.}.

@defun make-random-source/device
@defunx make-random-source/device @var{device}
Create and return a new randomness source using the specified
@var{device} to generate random integers in the range @math{[0,
2^{32})}.  When @var{device} is not specified, it defaults to
@file{/dev/urandom}.

We have to remember that reading @file{/dev/random} will @strong{block}
if not enough entropy is available, waiting for more randomness to be
provided by the system.  This is why, by default, this function will use
@file{/dev/urandom}, which never blocks but provides randomness of
lesser quality.

The state returned by @func{random-source-state-ref} is a Scheme vector
of length 7, whose first value is the symbol
@code{random-source-state/device}.  The other values are the device
pathname, a cache vector of values, the index of the next value to be
extracted from the cace vector.
@end defun


@deffn Parameter random-device-cache-length
Device--based randomness sources cache read bytes into a bytevector of
fixed size.  This parameter allows us to select the size at source
construction time.  It is preset to @math{4096}.
@end deffn

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Low level @api{} for device randomness sources


@defun %random-bytevector @var{device} @var{number-of-bytes}
@defunx random-bytevector @var{number-of-bytes}
@defunx urandom-bytevector @var{number-of-bytes}
Read @var{number-of-bytes} from the specified @var{device} on the file
system and return them in a newly allocated bytevector.
@func{random-bytevector} is a specialised version reading bytes from
@file{/dev/random}.  @func{urandom-bytevector} is a specialised version
reading bytes from @file{/dev/urandom}.
@end defun


@defun %random-bytevector! @var{device} @var{bv}
@defunx random-bytevector! @var{bv}
@defunx urandom-bytevector! @var{bv}
Fill the bytevector @var{bv} with bytes read from the specified
@var{device} on the file system; return @var{bv} itself.
@func{random-bytevector!} is a specialised version reading bytes from
@file{/dev/random}.  @func{urandom-bytevector!} is a specialised version
reading bytes from @file{/dev/urandom}.
@end defun

@c page
@node random utils
@section Utilities


@menu
* random utils misc::           Miscellaneous utility functions.
* random utils lists::          Specialised list functions.
* random utils vectors::        Specialised vector functions.
* random utils strings::        Specialised string functions.
@end menu

@c page
@node random utils misc
@subsection Miscellaneous utility functions


The following bindings are exported by the @library{vicare crypto
randomisations} library.


@defun random-source-integers-maker-from-range @var{source} @var{start} @var{last}
@defunx random-source-integers-maker-from-range @var{source} @var{start} @var{last} @var{step}
Return a closure that, when evaluated with no arguments, returns a
random integer in the range selected by @var{start} and @var{last} both
included, using randomness from @var{source}.  @var{start} and
@var{last} must be exact integers.  The optional @var{step} argument,
which defaults to one, establishes the step of allowed values from the
range.
@end defun


@defun random-source-reals-maker-from-range @var{source} @var{start} @var{last}
@defunx random-source-reals-maker-from-range @var{source} @var{start} @var{last} @var{step}
Return a closure that, when evaluated with no arguments, returns a
random real in the range selected by @var{start} and @var{last}, using
randomness from @var{source}.  @var{start} and @var{last} must be real
numbers.

@itemize
@item
When @var{step} is not used: The result @math{R} is computed by
generating a random real @math{X} in the range @math{0 < X < 1}, then
computing:

@example
R = start + (last - start) * X
@end example

@noindent
so @math{R} is in the range delimited by @var{start} and @var{last} both
excluded.  The random real @math{X} is computed with no specified unit.
@ref{random source, @func{random-source-reals-maker}}, for details.

@item
When @var{step} is used: The result @math{R} is computed by generating a
random integer @var{N} in the range @math{0 <= N < U} with upper limit:

@example
U = floor[(last - start) / step]
@end example

@noindent
then computing:

@example
R = start + step * N
@end example

@noindent
so @math{R} is in the range delimited by @var{start} included and
@var{last} excluded.

@end itemize
@end defun


@defun random-permutations-maker @var{source}
Return a closure which, when applied to an integer number @var{n},
generates random permutations of the set @code{@{0, ..., n-1@}} using
randomness from @var{source}.  Such a permutation is represented by a
vector of length @var{n} for the images of the points.
@end defun

@c page
@node random utils lists
@subsection Specialised list functions


@cindex @library{vicare crypto randomisations lists}, library
@cindex Library @library{vicare crypto randomisations lists}


The auxiliary library @library{vicare crypto randomisations lists}
exports bindings specialised to handle lists and randomness sources; it
is based on @library{vicare crypto randomisations} only.


@defun random-list-unfold-numbers @var{number-maker} @var{number-of-numbers}
Given the closure @var{number-maker} returning a random number, build
and return a new list of @var{number-of-numbers} random numbers.
@end defun


@defun random-list-shuffle @var{ell} @var{source}
Build and return a new list shuffling the elements of @var{ell} using
randomness from the given @var{source}.
@end defun


@defun random-list-sample @var{ell} @var{source}
Return a closure that, when evaluated with no arguments, returns a
randomly selected item from @var{ell}, using randomness from
@var{source}.
@end defun


@defun random-list-sample-population @var{ell} @var{len} @var{source}
Return a closure that, when evaluated with no arguments, returns a list
of @var{len} items randomly selected from @var{ell}, using randomness
from @var{source}.
@end defun

@c page
@node random utils vectors
@subsection Specialised vector functions


@cindex @library{vicare crypto randomisations vectors}, library
@cindex Library @library{vicare crypto randomisations vectors}


The auxiliary library @library{vicare crypto randomisations vectors}
exports bindings specialised to handle vectors and randomness sources;
it is based on both @library{vicare crypto randomisations} and
@library{vicare containers vectors}.  Arguments to the following
functions follow the same conventions established for @library{vicare
containers vectors} and @library{vicare crypto vectors low}.
@ref{vectors convention, Interface conventions}


@defun random-vector-unfold-numbers @var{number-maker} @var{number-of-numbers}
Given the closure @var{number-maker} returning a random number, build
and return a new list of @var{number-of-numbers} random numbers.
@end defun


@deffn Function %random-vector-shuffle @var{source} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro random-vector-shuffle @var{V} @var{source}
Build a new vector copying the selected subvector, then shuffle it using
randomness from the given @var{source}.  Return the new vector.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %random-vector-shuffle! @var{source} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro random-vector-shuffle! @var{V} @var{source}
Shuffle the selected subvector using randomness from the given
@var{source}.  Return the shuffled vector itself.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %random-vector-sample @var{source} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro random-vector-sample @var{V} @var{source}
Return a closure that, when evaluated with no arguments, returns a
randomly selected item from the selected subvector, using randomness
from @var{source}.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %random-vector-sample-population @var{source} @var{len} @var{vec} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro random-vector-sample-population @var{V} @var{len} @var{source}
Return a closure that, when evaluated with no arguments, returns a
vector of @var{len} items randomly selected from the selected subvector
of @var{vec}, using randomness from @var{source}.
@end deffn


@defun random-integers-with-sum @var{requested-sum} @var{number-of-numbers} @var{inclusive-min} @var{inclusive-max} @var{source}
Return a vector of length @var{number-of-numbers}, holding random
integers in the range delimited by @var{inclusive-min} and
@var{inclusive-max}, generated using randomness from @var{source}.  The
integers are such that their sum equals @var{requested-sum}.
@end defun


@defun random-reals-with-sum @var{requested-sum} @var{tolerance} @var{number-of-numbers} @var{exclusive-min} @var{exclusive-max} @var{source}
Return a vector of length @var{number-of-numbers}, holding random reals
in the range delimited by @var{exclusive-min} and @var{exclusive-max},
generated using randomness from @var{source}.  The numbers are such that
their sum equals approximately @var{requested-sum} with @var{tolerance}:

@example
(< (- (abs @var{tolerance}))
   (abs (- @var{requested-sum} actual-sum))
   (abs @var{tolerance}))
@result{} #t
@end example
@end defun

@c page
@node random utils strings
@subsection Specialised string functions


@cindex @library{vicare crypto randomisations strings}, library
@cindex Library @library{vicare crypto randomisations strings}


The auxiliary library @library{vicare crypto randomisations strings}
exports bindings specialised to handle strings and randomness sources;
it is based on both @library{vicare crypto randomisations} and
@library{vicare containers strings}.  Arguments to the following
functions follow the same conventions established for @library{vicare
containers strings} and @library{vicare containers strings low}.
@ref{strings convention, Interface conventions}


@defun random-string-unfold-chars @var{integer-maker} @var{number-of-chars}
Given the closure @var{integer-maker} returning a random integer, build
and return a new string of @var{number-of-chars} random characters.

As a usage example, the following program will generate random passwords
with characters in the range of graphics @ascii{} codes (warning: for
real world applications, use a true random source):

@example
(import (rnrs)
  (vicare randomisations)
  (vicare randomisations strings)
  (vicare char-sets))

(random-string-unfold-chars
  (lambda ()
    (do ((ch (random-integer 127) (random-integer 127)))
        ((char-set-contains? char-set:ascii/graphic
                             (integer->char ch))
         ch)))
  10)
@end example
@end defun


@deffn Function %random-string-shuffle @var{source} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro random-string-shuffle @var{S} @var{source}
Build a new string copying the selected substring, then shuffle it using
randomness from the given @var{source}.  Return the new string.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %random-string-shuffle! @var{source} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro random-string-shuffle! @var{S} @var{source}
Shuffle the selected substring using randomness from the given
@var{source}.  Return the shuffled string itself.
@end deffn


@deffn Function %random-string-sample @var{source} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro random-string-sample @var{S} @var{source}
Return a closure that, when evaluated with no arguments, returns a
randomly selected item from the selected substring, using randomness
from @var{source}.
@end deffn

@deffn Function %random-string-sample-population @var{source} @var{len} @var{str} @var{start} @var{past}
@deffnx Macro random-string-sample-population @var{S} @var{len} @var{source}
Return a closure that, when evaluated with no arguments, returns a
string of @var{len} items randomly selected from the selected substring
of @var{str}, using randomness from @var{source}.
@end deffn

@c page
@node random generators
@section Auxiliary generators


@menu
* random generators mersenne::  The Mersenne twister.
* random generators marsaglia:: George Marsaglia's generators.
* random generators bbs::       Blum--Blum--Shub generator.
* random generators borosh::    Borosh generator.
* random generators cmrg::      Combined multiple recursive generator.
@end menu

@c page
@node random generators mersenne
@subsection The Mersenne twister


@cindex @library{vicare crypto randomisations mersenne}, library
@cindex Library @library{vicare crypto randomisations mersenne}


The Mersenne twister is a pseudorandom number generator developed in
1997 by Makoto Matsumoto and Takuji Nishimura:

@quotation
Matsumoto Makoto and Nishimura Takuji.  ``Mersenne twister: a
623--dimensionally equidistributed uniform pseudo--random number
generator''.  1998.  @acronym{ACM} Transactions on Modeling and Computer
Simulation.
@end quotation

@noindent
it provides for fast generation of very high--quality pseudorandom
numbers, having been designed specifically to rectify many of the flaws
found in older algorithms.  Its name derives from the fact that period
length is chosen to be a Mersenne prime@footnote{Wikipedia contributors,
``Mersenne twister'', Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia,
@url{http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mersenne_twister&oldid=299648661}
(accessed July 1, 2009).}.

The following bindings are exported by the @library{vicare crypto
randomisations mersenne} library.


@defun make-random-source/mersenne
Build and return a new randomness source using the Mersenne generator.

The state returned by @func{random-source-state-ref} is a Scheme vector
of length 626, whose first value is the symbol
@code{random-source-state/mersenne}.  The other values are integers
representable with @math{32} bits.

The @func{random-source-seed!} function for this generator, must be
applied tot a numbers maker returning integers representable with
@math{32} bits.
@end defun


@library{vicare crypto randomisations mersenne} initialises the
generator drawing @math{32} bits integer numbers from a specifically
built MRG32k3a randomness source, which in turn is initialised with the
default @library{vicare crypto randomisations} seeds.  @ref{random
mrg32k3a, L'Ecuyer's MRG32k3a generator}

@c page
@node random generators marsaglia
@subsection George Marsaglia's generators


@cindex @library{vicare crypto randomisations marsaglia}, library
@cindex Library @library{vicare crypto randomisations marsaglia}


The generators described here were posted by George Marsaglia in a
thread on @url{sci.stat.math} and @url{sci.crypt} starting on January,
12 1999.  The following bindings are exported by the @library{vicare
crypto randomisations marsaglia} library.

For all the randomness sources, the @func{random-source-seed!} function
must be applied to a number maker returning integers representable with
@math{32} bits.


@defun make-random-source/marsaglia/cong
Build and return a new randomness source using the CONG generator.

The state returned by @func{random-source-state-ref} is a Scheme vector
of length 2, whose first value is the symbol
@code{random-source-state/marsaglia/cong}.  The other value is a single
integer representable with @math{32} bits.
@end defun


@defun make-random-source/marsaglia/fib
Build and return a new randomness source using the FIB generator.

The state returned by @func{random-source-state-ref} is a Scheme vector
of length 3, whose first value is the symbol
@code{random-source-state/marsaglia/fib}.  The other values are integers
representable with @math{32} bits.
@end defun


@defun make-random-source/marsaglia/lfib4
Build and return a new randomness source using the LFIB4 generator.

The state returned by @func{random-source-state-ref} is a Scheme vector
of length 258, whose first value is the symbol
@code{random-source-state/marsaglia/lfib4}.  The other values are
integers representable with @math{32} bits.
@end defun


@defun make-random-source/marsaglia/kiss
Build and return a new randomness source using the KISS generator.

The state returned by @func{random-source-state-ref} is a Scheme vector
of length 5, whose first value is the symbol
@code{random-source-state/marsaglia/kiss}.  The other values are
integers representable with @math{32} bits.
@end defun


@defun make-random-source/marsaglia/mwc
Build and return a new randomness source using the MWC generator.

The state returned by @func{random-source-state-ref} is a Scheme vector
of length 3, whose first value is the symbol
@code{random-source-state/marsaglia/mwc}.  The other values are integers
representable with @math{32} bits.
@end defun


@defun make-random-source/marsaglia/shr3
Build and return a new randomness source using the SHR3 generator.

The state returned by @func{random-source-state-ref} is a Scheme vector
of length 2, whose first value is the symbol
@code{random-source-state/marsaglia/shr3}.  The other value is an
integer representable with @math{32} bits.
@end defun


@defun make-random-source/marsaglia/swb
Build and return a new randomness source using the SWB generator.

The state returned by @func{random-source-state-ref} is a Scheme vector
of length 261, whose first value is the symbol
@code{random-source-state/marsaglia/swb}.  The other values are integers
representable with @math{32} bits.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Algorithms

Here is the core C language implementation of the generators, as posted
by Marsaglia (line wrapping added here, and small bits changed):

@example
#define znew    (z = 36969 * (z & 65535)        \
                   + (z >> 16))

#define wnew    (w = 18000 * (w & 65535)        \
                   + (w >> 16))

#define MWC     ((znew << 16) + wnew)

#define SHR3    (jsr ^= (jsr << 17),  \
                 jsr ^= (jsr >> 13),  \
                 jsr ^= (jsr << 5))

#define CONG    (jcong = 69069 * jcong + 1234567)

#define FIB     ((b = a + b),    \
                 (a = b - a))

#define KISS    ((MWC^CONG) + SHR3)

#define LFIB4   (c++,                           \
                 t[c] = t[c]                    \
                      + t[(uint8_t)(c +  58)]   \
                      + t[(uint8_t)(c + 119)]   \
                      + t[(uint8_t)(c + 178)])

#define SWB     (c++,                                   \
                 bro  = (x < y),                        \
                 t[c] = (x = t[(uint8_t)(c + 34)])      \
                           - (y = t[(uint8_t)(c + 19)]  \
                                + bro))

#define UNI   (KISS * 2.328306e-10)
#define VNI   (((int32_t) KISS) * 4.656613e-10)

#define UC    (uint8_t)   /* a cast operation */

/* Use random seeds to reset z, w, jsr, jcong, a, b,
   and the table t[256] */
uint32_t  z, w, jsr, jcong, a, b, t[256];

uint32_t  x=0, y=0, bro;
uint8_t   c=0;
@end example

What follows is the comment part of the original post by Marsaglia
himself, with minor editing for formatting purposes and porting to
Scheme (errors in the original text are probably present here, too):

@quotation
Any one of KISS, MWC, FIB, LFIB4, SWB, SHR3, or CONG can be used in an
expression to provide a random @math{32} bits integer.

The KISS generator (Keep It Simple Stupid) is designed to combine the
two multiply--with--carry generators in MWC with the @math{3}--shift
register SHR3 and the congruential generator CONG, using addition and
exclusive--or.  Period about @math{2^{123}}.  It is one of my favorite
generators.

The MWC generator concatenates two 16 bits multiply--with--carry
generators:

@example
x(n) = 36969 * x(n-1) + carry
y(n) = 18000 * y(n-1) + carry mod 2^16
@end example

@noindent
has period about @math{2^{60}} and seems to pass all tests of
randomness.  A favorite stand--alone generator---faster than KISS, which
contains it.

FIB is the classical Fibonacci sequence:

@example
x(n) = x(n-1) + x(n-2)
@end example

@noindent
but taken modulo @math{2^{32}}.  Its period is @math{3 * 2^{31}} if one
of its two seeds is odd and not @math{1 mod 8}.  It has little worth as
a @acronym{RNG} by itself, but provides a simple and fast component for
use in combination generators.

SHR3 is a @math{3}--shift--register generator with period @math{2^{32} -
1}.  It uses:

@example
y(n) = y(n-1) * (I + L^17) * (I + R^13) * (I+L^5)
@end example

@noindent
with the @math{y} viewed as binary vectors, @math{L} the @math{32 x 32}
binary matrix that shifts a vector left @math{1}, and @math{R} its
transpose.  SHR3 seems to pass all tests except those related to the
binary rank test, since @math{32} successive values, as binary vectors,
must be linearly independent, while @math{32} successive truly random 32
bits integers, viewed as binary vectors, will be linearly independent
only about 29% of the time.

CONG is a congruential generator with the widely used @math{69069}
multiplier:

@example
x(n) = 69069 * x(n-1) + 1234567
@end example

@noindent
it has period @math{2^{32}}.  The leading half of its @math{32} bits
seem to pass tests, but bits in the last half are too regular.

LFIB4 is an extension of what I have previously defined as a lagged
Fibonacci generator:

@example
x(n) = x(n-r) op x(n-s)
@end example

@noindent
with the @math{x} in a finite set over which there is a binary operation
@math{op}, such as @math{+}, @math{-} on integers modulo @math{2^{32}},
@math{*} on odd such integers, exclusive-or(xor) on binary vectors.

Except for those using multiplication, lagged Fibonacci generators fail
various tests of randomness, unless the lags are very long.  (See SWB
below).  To see if more than two lags would serve to overcome the
problems of @math{2}-lag generators using @math{+}, @math{-} or
@math{xor}, I have developed the @math{4}--lag generator LFIB4 using
addition:

@example
x(n) = [x(n-256) + x(n-179) + x(n-119) + x(n-55)] mod 2^32
@end example

@noindent
its period is @math{2^{31} * (2^{256} - 1)}, about @math{2^{287}}, and
it seems to pass all tests---in particular, those of the kind for which
@math{2}-lag generators using @math{+}, @math{-}, @math{xor} seem to
fail.  For even more confidence in its suitability, LFIB4 can be
combined with KISS, with a resulting period of about @math{2^{410}},
just use:

@example
(let* ((kiss       (make-random-source/marsaglia/kiss))
       (cong       (make-random-source/marsaglia/cong))
       (k-integers (random-source-integers-maker kiss))
       (c-integers (random-source-integers-maker cong))
       (integers   (lambda (U M)
                     (mod (+ (k-integers U)
                             (c-integers U))
                          M))))
  ---)
@end example

@noindent
in any Scheme expression.

SWB is a subtract--with--borrow generator that I developed to give a
simple method for producing extremely long periods:

@example
x(n) = [x(n-222) - x(n-237) - borrow] mod 2^32
@end example

@noindent
the @code{borrow} is @math{0}, or set to @math{1} if computing
@math{x(n-1)} caused overflow in 32 bits integer arithmetic. This
generator has a very long period, @math{2^{7098} * (2^{480} - 1)}, about
@math{2^{7578}}.  It seems to pass all tests of randomness, except for
the Birthday Spacings test, which it fails badly, as do all lagged
Fibonacci generators using @math{+}, @math{-} or @math{xor}.

I would suggest combining SWB with KISS, MWC, SHR3, or CONG.  KISS+SWB
has period @math{>2^{7700}} and is highly recommended.
Subtract--with--borrow has the same local behaviour as lagged Fibonacci
using @math{+}, @math{-}, @math{xor}---the borrow merely provides a much
longer period.  SWB fails the birthday spacings test, as do all lagged
Fibonacci and other generators that merely combine two previous values
by means of @math{+}, @math{-} or @math{xor}.  Those failures are for a
particular case: @math{m = 512} birthdays in a year of @math{n = 2^{24}}
days.  There are choices of @math{m} and @math{n} for which lags
@math{>1000} will also fail the test.  A reasonable precaution is to
always combine a @math{2}-lag Fibonacci or SWB generator with another
kind of generator, unless the generator uses @math{*}, for which a very
satisfactory sequence of odd @math{32} bits integers results.

The classical Fibonacci sequence @math{mod 2^{32}} from FIB fails
several tests.  It is not suitable for use by itself, but is quite
suitable for combining with other generators.

The last half of the bits of CONG are too regular, and it fails tests
for which those bits play a significant role.  CONG+FIB will also have
too much regularity in trailing bits, as each does.  But keep in mind
that it is a rare application for which the trailing bits play a
significant role.  CONG is one of the most widely used generators of the
last @math{30} years, as it was the system generator for VAX and was
incorporated in several popular software packages, all seemingly without
complaint.
@end quotation

The generators are seeded as follows:

@table @asis
@item CONG
The seed values are:

@example
jcong = 2524969849
@end example

@noindent
with this seeding it is known that the millionth integer is
@math{1529210297}.

@item FIB
The seed values are:

@example
a =  9983651
b = 95746118
@end example

@noindent
with this seeding it is known that the millionth integer is
@math{3519793928}.

@item KISS
The seed values are:

@example
jcong = 1017008441
jsr   = 3259917390
w     =   99545079
z     = 2247183469
@end example

@noindent
with this seeding it is known that the millionth integer is
@math{1372460312}.

@item LFIB4
The seed values are stored in a vector of length 256, holding @math{32}
bits representable integers; the index into the vector is set to @code{c
= 0}.  The seed values of the vector are precomputed, see the source
code of the library.

With this seeding it is known that the millionth integer is
@math{1064612766}.

@item MWC
The seed values are:

@example
w = 1046675282
z = 2374144069
@end example

@noindent
with this seeding it is known that the millionth integer is
@math{904977562}.

@item SHR3
The seed values are:

@example
jsr = 4176875757
@end example

@noindent
with this seeding it is known that the millionth integer is
@math{2642725982}.

@item SWB
The seed values are stored in a vector of length 256, holding @math{32}
bits representable integers; the index into the vector is set to @code{c
= 64}.  The seed values of the vector are precomputed, see the source
code of the library.

With this seeding it is known that the millionth integer is
@math{627749721}.
@end table

@c page
@node random generators bbs
@subsection Blum--Blum--Shub generator


@cindex @library{vicare crypto randomisations blum-blum-shub}, library
@cindex Library @library{vicare crypto randomisations blum-blum-shub}


Blum--Blum--Shub is a @acronym{PRNG} proposed in:

@quotation
Lenore Blum, Manuel Blum, Michael Shub.  ``A Simple Unpredictable
Pseudo--Random Number Generator'', SIAM Journal on Computing, volume 15,
page 364-383, May 1986.
@end quotation

@noindent
when seeded with prime numbers satisfying the specified requirements, it
can be considered a cryptographically secure @acronym{PRNG}.  The search
of such prime numbers is a delicate and complex task; we have to turn to
specialised literature to learn how to do it.

The following bindings are exported by the @library{vicare crypto
randomisations blum-blum-shub} library.  The library makes no attempt to
validate the seed numbers for the cryptographic requirements, it just
implements the @acronym{PRNG} algorithm; attaining cryptographic
security is entirely on our shoulders.


@defun make-random-source/blum-blum-shub
Build and return a new randomness source using the BBS generator.  The
returned randomness source is @strong{not} seeded; this is because
seeding a cryptographically secure generator must be done with care, and
it makes no sense to have a default seed.  The first operation after the
creation of the source should be to seed it.

The state returned by @func{random-source-state-ref} is a Scheme vector
of length 5, whose first value is the symbol
@code{random-source-state/blum-blum-shub}.  The other values are integer
numbers.

The @func{random-source-seed!} function for this generator, must be
applied to a numbers maker returning:

@enumerate
@item
The value of the prime number @math{P}.

@item
The value of the prime number @math{Q}.

@item
Integers numbers until one is found whose GCD with @math{P * Q} is
@math{1}.
@end enumerate

@noindent
see the algorithm details below.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading The algorithm

BBS generates a sequence of bits, not of numbers.  Bits can be
concatenated to yield numbers of any sort in base 2.  Seeding goes like
this:

@enumerate
@item
Select two prime numbers @math{P} and @math{Q} and compute @math{M = P *
Q}, which will be the modulus of the internally generated integers.
These primes are the ``secret'' of the generated sequence of
pseudo--random integers; for cryptographic purposes they have to be kept
hidden.

@item
Generate (using another @acronym{PRNG}) random integers @math{S} until
one is found such that: The greatest commond divisor (GCD) between
@math{S} and @math{M} is @math{1}.  Notice that @rnrs{6} Scheme
implementations already provide a @func{gcd} function.  @nauref{baselib
math ops arithmetic, Arithmetic operations}

@item
Compute the seed @math{X}:

@example
X = (S * S) mod M
@end example
@end enumerate

The generator in @library{vicare crypto randomisations blum-blum-shub}
computes a new integer @math{N} representable with @math{32} bits, from
an initial state @math{X} with the following formulation:

@example
X0 = (X * X) mod M
b0 = parity(X0)

X1 = (X0 * X0) mod M
b1 = parity(X1)

X2 = (X1 * X1) mod M
b2 = parity(X2)

...
@end example

@noindent
where @math{b(k)} are the bits of @math{N}, with @math{0 <= k < 32}, and
@math{X32} is the new state of the generator.  The function
@math{parity(X)} is the number of bits set to @math{1} in @math{X},
modulo @math{2}.

@c page
@node random generators borosh
@subsection Borosh generator


@cindex @library{vicare crypto randomisations borosh}, library
@cindex Library @library{vicare crypto randomisations borosh}


This generator is called @dfn{Borosh--Niederreiter}.  It was taken from:

@quotation
Donald E. Knuth.  ``The Art of Computer Programming''.  Volume 2.  Third
Edition.  Addison-Wesley.  Page 106-108.
@end quotation

@noindent
the following bindings are exported by the @library{vicare crypto
randomisations borosh} library.


@defun make-random-source/borosh
Build and return a new randomness source using the
@dfn{Borosh--Niederreiter} generator.

The state returned by @func{random-source-state-ref} is a Scheme vector
of length 2, whose first value is the symbol
@code{random-source-state/borosh}.  The other value is a single integer
representable with @math{32} bits.

The @func{random-source-seed!} function for this generator, must be
applied to a numbers maker returning integers representable with
@math{32} bits.
@end defun


@subsubheading The algorithm

The generator computes a new integer @math{N'} from an initial state
@math{N} with the following formulation:

@example
M = 2^32
A = 1812433253

N' = (A * N) mod M
@end example

@noindent
@library{vicare crypto randomisations borosh} sets the initial state to
@math{N = 1}.

@c page
@node random generators cmrg
@subsection Combined multiple recursive generator


@cindex @library{vicare crypto randomisations cmrg}, library
@cindex Library @library{vicare crypto randomisations cmrg}


This is a combined multiple recursive generator.  The algorithm was
derived from:@footnote{It is available from L'Ecuyer's home page
(@aurl{} last verified Tue Jul 14, 2009):

@center @url{http://www.iro.umontreal.ca/~lecuyer/myftp/papers/combmrg.ps}
@center @url{ftp://ftp.iro.umontreal.ca/pub/simulation/lecuyer/papers/combmrg.ps}
}

@quotation
P.  L'Ecuyer.  ``Combined Multiple Recursive Random Number Generators''.
Operations Research, 44, 5 (1996), 816--822.
@end quotation

@noindent
the following bindings are exported by the @library{vicare crypto
randomisations cmrg} library.


@defun make-random-source/cmrg
Build and return a new randomness source using a @acronym{CMRG}
generator.

The state returned by @func{random-source-state-ref} is a Scheme vector
of length 7, whose first value is the symbol
@code{random-source-state/cmrg}.  The other values are integers
representable with @math{32} bits.

The @func{random-source-seed!} function for this generator, must be
applied to a numbers maker returning integers representable with
@math{32} bits.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading The algorithm

The sequence is:

@example
N = (X0 - Y0) mod m1
@end example

@noindent
where the two underlying generators @math{X} and @math{Y} are:

@example
X0 = (A1 X1 + A2 X2 + A3 X3) mod M1
Y0 = (B1 Y1 + B2 X2 + B3 Y3) mod M2
@end example

@noindent
with coefficients:

@example
A1 = 0       A2 = 63308   A3 = -183326
B1 = 86098   B2 = 0       B3 = -539608
@end example

@noindent
and moduli:

@example
M1 = 2^31 - 1       = 2147483647
M2 = 2^31 - 2000169 = 2145483479
@end example

According to the paper the initial values for @math{X} must lie in the
range @math{0 <= X < M1} and the initial values for @math{Y} must lie in
the range @math{0 <= Y < M2}, with at least one non--zero value.
@library{vicare crypto randomisations cmrg} initialises the generator
with:

@example
X1 = 7   X2 = 17   X3 = 47
Y1 = 3   Y2 = 13   Y3 = 43
@end example

@noindent
and the seeding procedure implemented by the randomness source (through
@func{random-source-seed!}) will extract random numbers from the given
generator until it is @math{0 < X < M1} and @math{0 < Y < M2}.

@c page
@node random dist
@section Random numbers from known distributions


@cindex @library{vicare crypto randomisations distributions}, library
@cindex Library @library{vicare crypto randomisations distributions}


The following functions are exported by the @library{vicare crypto
randomisations distributions} library.


@defun random-exponentials-maker @var{source}
Return a closure which, when applied to a real number argument @var{mu},
generates exponentially @math{exp(mu)} distributed random numbers using
randomness from @var{source}.
@end defun


@defun random-normals-maker @var{source}
Return a closure which, when applied to real number arguments @var{mu}
and @var{sigma}, generates normally distributed @math{N(mu, sigma)}
random numbers using randomness from @var{source}.
@end defun

@c end of file
