@node srfi receive
@section @ansrfi{8} @func{receive}: Binding to multiple values


@cindex @srfi{} receive


The library @library{srfi :8} is by John David Stone (Department of
Mathematics and Computer Science, Grinnell College, Grinnell, Iowa
50112, @email{stone@@cs.grinnell.edu}) as the reference implementation
for @ansrfi{8}; see:

@center @url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-8/srfi-8.html}

@noindent
for more details.

@menu
* srfi receive license::        Receive document license.
* srfi receive abstract::       Abstract.
* srfi receive rationale::      Rationale.
* srfi receive spec::           Specification.
@end menu

@c page
@node srfi receive license
@subsection Receive document license


Copyright @copyright{} 1999 John David Stone.  All Rights Reserved.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

@c page
@node srfi receive abstract
@subsection Abstract


The only mechanism that @rnrs{5} provides for binding identifiers to the
values of a multiple--valued expression is the primitive
@func{call-with-values}.  This @srfi{} proposes a more concise, more
readable syntax for creating such bindings.

@c page
@node srfi receive rationale
@subsection Rationale


Although @rnrs{5} supports multiple--valued expressions, it provides
only the essential procedures @func{values} and @func{call-with-values}.
It is evident that the authors expected Scheme programmers to define
other constructs in terms of these, abstracting common patterns of use.

One such pattern consists in binding an identifier to each of the values
of a multiple--valued expression and then evaluating an expression in
the scope of the bindings.  As an instance of this pattern, consider the
following excerpt from a quicksort procedure:

@example
(call-with-values
  [lambda ()
    (partition (precedes pivot) others)]
  [lambda (fore aft)
    (append (qsort fore) (cons pivot (qsort aft)))])
@end example

Here @func{partition} is a multiple--valued procedure that takes two
arguments, a predicate and a list, and returns two lists, one comprising
the list elements that satisfy the predicate, the other those that do
not.  The purpose of the expression shown is to partition the list
@var{others}, sort each of the sublists, and recombine the results into
a sorted list.

For our purposes, the important step is the binding of the identifiers
fore and aft to the values returned by @func{partition}.  Expressing the
construction and use of these bindings with the @func{call-by-values}
primitive is cumbersome: One must explicitly embed the expression that
provides the values for the bindings in a parameterless procedure, and
one must explicitly embed the expression to be evaluated in the scope of
those bindings in another procedure, writing as its parameters the
identifiers that are to be bound to the values received.

These embeddings are boilerplate, exposing the underlying binding
mechanism but not revealing anything relevant to the particular program
in which it occurs.  So the use of a syntactic abstraction that exposes
only the interesting parts (the identifiers to be bound, the
multiple--valued expression that supplies the values, and the body of
the receiving procedure) makes the code more concise and more readable:

@example
(receive (fore aft)
    [partition (precedes pivot) others]
  [append (qsort fore)
          (cons pivot (qsort aft))])
@end example

The advantages are similar to those of a @func{let}--expression over a
procedure call with a @func{lambda}--expression as its operator.  In
both cases, cleanly separating a ``header'' in which the bindings are
established from a ``body'' in which they are used makes it easier to
follow the code.

@c page
@node srfi receive spec
@subsection Specification


@cindex @srfi{} receive api


@deffn Syntax receive @var{formals} @var{expression} @var{body}
@var{formals}, @var{expression}, and @var{body} are as described in
@rnrs{5}.  Specifically, @var{formals} can have any of three forms:

@table @code
@item (variable1 ... variablen)
The environment in which the @func{receive}--expression is evaluated is
extended by binding @var{variable1}, ..., @var{variablen} to fresh
locations.  The @var{expression} is evaluated, and its values are stored
into those locations (it is an error if @var{expression} does not have
exactly @var{n} values).

@item variable
The environment in which the @func{receive}--expression is evaluated is
extended by binding @var{variable} to a fresh location.  The
@var{expression} is evaluated, its values are converted into a newly
allocated list, and the list is stored in the location bound to
@var{variable}.

@item (variable1 ... variablen . variablen+1)
The environment in which the @func{receive}--expression is evaluated is
extended by binding @var{variable1}, ..., @var{variablen+1} to fresh
locations.  The @var{expression} is evaluated.  Its first @var{n} values
are stored into the locations bound to @var{variable1}, ...,
@var{variablen}.  Any remaining values are converted into a newly
allocated list, which is stored into the location bound to
@var{variablen+1} (it is an error if @var{expression} does not have at
least @var{n} values.
@end table

In any case, the expressions in @var{body} are evaluated sequentially in
the extended environment.  The results of the last expression in the
body are the values of the @var{receive}--expression.
@end deffn

@c end of file
