@node references
@appendix Bibliography and references


@noindent
``Revised^6 Report on the Algorithmic Language Scheme.''  Michael
Sperber and R. Kent Dybvig and Matthew Flatt and Anton Van Straaten
(Editors).  2007.

@noindent
``Revised^6 Report on the Algorithmic Language Scheme---Standard
Libraries.''  Michael Sperber and R. Kent Dybvig and Matthew Flatt and
Anton Van Straaten (Editors). 2007.

@noindent
``Scheme Request for Implementation 41: Streams.''  Philip L. Bewig.
2007.  @url{http://@/srfi.schemers.org/@/srfi-41/@/srfi-41.html}

@noindent
``Guardians in a generation--based garbage collector''.  R. Kent Dybvig
and Carl Bruggeman and David Eby.  PLDI '93, pages 207--216, June 1993.
Introduces guardians and describes the implementation of guardians and
weak pairs in Chez Scheme.

@noindent
``Don't stop the BiBOP: Flexible and efficient storage management
for dynamically--typed languages.''  R. Kent Dybvig and David Eby and
Carl Bruggeman.  Technical Report 400, Indiana University, March 1994.
Describes Chez Scheme's storage management system.

@noindent
``Generation Friendly Eq Hash Tables.''  Abdulaziz Ghuloum and
R. Kent Dybvig. In ``Proceedings of the 2007 Workshop on Scheme and
Functional Programming'', pages 207--216.  Universite Laval Technical
Report DIUL-RT-0701, 2007.

@noindent
``Extending the Scope of Syntactic Abstraction.''  Oscar Waddell.
PhD thesis, Indiana University Computer Science Department, August 1999.
@url{http://www.cs.indiana.edu/@/~owaddell/@/papers/@/thesis.ps.gz}

@noindent
``Extending the Scope of Syntactic Abstraction.''  Oscar Waddell and
R. Kent Dybvig.  In ``Conference Record of POPL'99: The 26th ACM
SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages'', pages
203--213, January 1999.
@url{http://www.cs.indiana.edu/@/~dyb/@/papers/@/popl99.ps.gz}

@noindent
``Chez Scheme Version 7 User's Guide.''  R. Kent Dybvig.  Cadence
Research Systems, 2005.  User's guide and reference manual for Chez
Scheme Version 7.  @url{http://@/www.scheme.com/@/csug7/}

@noindent
``Implicit phasing for R6RS libraries.''  Abdulaziz Ghuloum and
R. Kent Dybvig.  In ``ICFP '07: Proceedings of the 2007 ACM SIGPLAN
international conference on Functional programming'', pages 303--314.
New York, NY, USA, 2007.  ACM.

@noindent
Michael D.  Adams and R.  Kent Dybvig.  ``Efficient nondestructive
equality checking for trees and graphs.''  In ICFP '08: Proceeding of
the 13th ACM SIGPLAN international conference on Functional programming,
pages 179-188.  ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2008.  ISBN
978-1-59593-919-7. doi: 10.1145/1411204.1411230.

@noindent
Oscar Waddell, Dipanwita Sarkar, R. Kent Dybvig.  ``Fixing Letrec: A
Faithful Yet Efficient Implementation of Scheme's Recursive Binding
Construct''.

@noindent
Abdulaziz Ghuloum, R. Kent Dybvig.  ``Fixing Letrec (reloaded)''.
Workshop on Scheme and Functional Programming '09.

@noindent
J. Michael Ashley, R. Kent Dybvig.  ``An Efficient Implementation of
Multiple Return Values in Scheme''.  Proceedings of the 1994 ACM
Conference on LISP and Functional Programming, 140--149, 1994.
Copyright @copyright{} 1994 ACM.

@noindent
@anchor{bib:HDBControl}[HDBControl] Robert Hieb, R. Kent Dybvig, Carl
Bruggeman.  ``Representing Control in the Presence of First--Class
Continuations''.  Proceedings of the SIGPLAN '90 Conference on
Programming Language Design and Implementation, 66--77, June 1990.
Copyright @copyright{} 1990 ACM.

@c end of file
