@node srfi specialize-procedures
@section @ansrfi{26} Notation for specializing parameters without currying


@cindex @srfi{} specialize-procedures


The library @library{srfi :26} is by Sebastian Egner as the reference
implementation for @ansrfi{26}; see:

@center @url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-26/srfi-26.html}

@noindent
for more details.

@menu
* srfi specialize-procedures license::    Original document license.
* srfi specialize-procedures abstract::   Abstract.
* srfi specialize-procedures rationale::  Rationale.
* srfi specialize-procedures spec::       Specification.
* srfi specialize-procedures design::     Rationale design.
* srfi specialize-procedures ack::        Acknowledgements.
@end menu

@c page
@node srfi specialize-procedures license
@subsection Original document license


Copyright @copyright{} 2002 Sebastian Egner.  All Rights Reserved.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

@c page
@node srfi specialize-procedures abstract
@subsection Abstract


When programming in functional style, it is frequently necessary to
specialize some of the parameters of a multi--parameter procedure.  For
example, from the binary operation @func{cons} one might want to obtain
the unary operation @code{(lambda (x) (cons 1 x))}.  This specialization
of parameters is also known as ``partial application'', ``operator
section'' or ``projection''.

The mechanism proposed here allows to write this sort of specialization
in a simple and compact way.  The mechanism is best explained by a few
examples:

@example
(cut cons (+ a 1) <>)   = (lambda (x2) (cons (+ a 1) x2))
(cut list 1 <> 3 <> 5)  = (lambda (x2 x4) (list 1 x2 3 x4 5))
(cut list)              = (lambda () (list))
(cut list 1 <> 3 <...>) = (lambda (x2 . xs) (apply list 1 x2 3 xs))
(cut <> a b)            = (lambda (f) (f a b))
@end example

As you see, the macro @func{cut} specializes some of the parameters of
its first argument.  The parameters that are to show up as formal
variables of the result are indicated by the symbol @code{<>}, pronouced
as ``slot''.  In addition, the symbol @code{<...>}, pronounced as
``rest--slot'', matches all residual arguments of a variable argument
procedure.  As you can see from the last example above, the first
argument can also be a slot, as one should expect in Scheme.

In addition to @func{cut}, there is a variant called @func{cute} (a
mnemonic for ``@func{cut} with evaluated non--slots'') which evaluates
the non--slot expressions at the time the procedure is specialized, not
at the time the specialized procedure is called.  For example:

@example
(cute cons (+ a 1) <>) = (let ([a1 (+ a 1)])
                           (lambda (x2)
                             (cons a1 x2)))
@end example

As you see from comparing this example with the first example above, the
@func{cute}--variant will evaluate @code{(+ a 1)} once, while the
@func{cut}--variant will evaluate it during every invocation of the
resulting procedure.

The mechanism proposed in this @srfi{} allows specializing any subset
of the variables of a procedure.  The result can be of fixed arity or of
variable arity.  The mechanism does not allow permutation, omission,
duplication or any other processing of the arguments; for this it is
necessary to write to use a different mechanism such as @func{lambda}.

@c page
@node srfi specialize-procedures rationale
@subsection Rationale


A particularly elegant way to deal with specialization is known as
currying (Schoenfinkel 1924, Curry 1958).  The idea of currying is to
reduce multi--argument functions to single--argument functions by
regarding an @var{n}--ary function as a unary function mapping its first
argument into an (@var{n-1})--ary function (which is curried in turn).
This point of view, apart from its theoretical elegance, allows an
extremely compact notation for specializing the first argument of a
function.  In the first example, one could simply write @code{(cons 1)}.

Yet, Scheme is not a curried language---the number of arguments passed
to a procedure must match the number of its parameters at all times.
This allows zero--arity and variable--arity procedures but in order to
specialize parameters one usually has to write down a lambda--expression
and invent some irrelevant identifiers for its formal variables (@var{x}
in the examples in the Abstract).  For this reason, the mechanism
proposed in this @srfi{} provides a simple and compact notation for
specializing any subset of the parameters of a procedure.

Note: @emph{The mechanism proposed here is not currying!}

The purpose of the mechanism proposed here is to make the benefits of
currying available within the programming language Scheme.  There are
two primary benefits of currying in practice: Higher--order types are
substantially simplified and there is a simple notation for specializing
parameters.  The type aspect is irrelevant as Scheme has latent typing.
The specialization aspect is largly covered with this @srfi{}.

Here are a few more examples for illustration:

@example
(map (cut * 2 <>) '(1 2 3 4))
(map (cut vector-set! x <> 0) indices)
(for-each (cut write <> port) exprs)
(map (cut <> x y z) (list min max))
(for-each (cut <>) thunks)
@end example

@c page
@node srfi specialize-procedures spec
@subsection Specification


@findex cut
@findex cute

The formal syntax of a specialized expression, in the style of the
Revised^5 Report on the Algorithmic Language Scheme:

@example
<cut-expression> -->  (cut  <slot-or-expr> <slot-or-expr>*)
                    | (cut  <slot-or-expr> <slot-or-expr>* <...>)
                    | (cute <slot-or-expr> <slot-or-expr>*)
                    | (cute <slot-or-expr> <slot-or-expr>* <...>)

<slot-or-expr>   -->  <>              ; a "slot"
                    | <expression>    ; a "non-slot expression"
@end example

The macro @func{cut} transforms a @code{<cut-expression>} into a
@code{<lambda expression>} with as many formal variables as there are
slots in the list @code{<slot-or-expr>*}.  The body of the resulting
@code{<lambda expression>} calls the first @code{<slot-or-expr>} with
arguments from @code{<slot-or-expr>*} in the order they appear.

In case there is a rest--slot symbol, the resulting procedure is also of
variable arity, and the body calls the first @code{<slot-or-expr>} with
all arguments provided to the actual call of the specialized procedure.

The macro @func{cute} is similar to the macro @func{cut}, except that it
first binds new variables to the result of evaluating the non--slot
expressions (in an unspecific order) and then substituting the variables
for the non--slot expressions.  In effect, @func{cut} evaluates
non--slot expressions at the time the resulting procedure is called,
whereas @func{cute} evaluates the non--slot expressions at the time the
procedure is constructed.

@c page
@node srfi specialize-procedures design
@subsection Rationale design


@subsubheading Why not real currying/uncurrying?

It is possible in Scheme to implement a macro turning a multi--argument
procedure into a nesting of single--argument procedures and back.  These
operations are usually called ``curry'' and ``uncurry'' in other
programming languages.

Yet, Scheme remains an inherently uncurried language and is not prepared
to deal with curried procedures in a convenient way.  Hence, a ``by the
book'' implementation of currying would only be useful if you apply it
in the sequence ``curry, specialize some arguments, and uncurry again'',
which is exactly the purpose of the macro @func{cut} specified in this
document.  The primary relevance of currying/uncurrying in Scheme is to
teach concepts of combinatory logic.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Why not a more general mechanism, also allowing permutation omission and duplication of arguments?

@noindent
The reason is that I, the author of this @srfi{}, consider more general
mechanisms too dangerous to mix them with the mechanism proposed here.
In particular, as soon as parameters are being rearranged it is usually
necessary to be aware of the meaning of the parameters; unnamed
variables can be quite harmful then.  The mechanism proposed here is
designed to prevent this.

Please refer to the discussion threads ``OK, how about...,'' (Alan
Bawden), ``is that useful?'' (Walter C.  Pelissero), and ``l, the
ultimate curry that is not curry'' (Al Petrofsky).

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Why are the macro called @func{cut}/@func{cute} and not [enter your favourite here]?

@noindent
Well, the original name proposed for this @srfi{} was @func{curry}
which immediately stirred some emotions as it does not what is commonly
known as currying.  Some alternatives have been discussed, such as:

@example
section         specialise      specialize,
partial-apply   partial-call    partial-lambda,
_j              _i              $
&               srfi-26         foobar
xyz             schoenfinkelize curry-which-isnt-curry
tandoori
@end example

@noindent
and it has also been suggested to pick a five letter symbol uniformly at
random and fix this as a name.  To be fair, not all of these name have
been put forward as serious proposals, some of them were merely to
illustrate a point in the discussion.  In addition, I have played with
the game of the name quite a bit and considered other candidates not
listed here.

Despite the fact that the discussion list only represents a highly
biased random sample of people's opinion (motivation to post a message
is higher if you disagree, for example) it told me that the @srfi{}
could potentially benefit from a different name; however impractical it
may be to go for unanimous popularity.

The name @func{cut} refers to ``operator section'', as the concept is
often called in other programming languages, but I tend to remember it
as the acronym for ``Curry Upon This''. ;-) The names for the evaluating
version of @func{cut} that have been proposed were @func{cut!},
@func{cutlet}, @func{cut*}, and @func{cute}.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Is it possible to implement the @srfi{} without macros?

@noindent
Not really.  As Stephan Houben has pointed out during the discussion
(refer to ``Implementing it as a procedure'') it is possible to
implement the @func{cute}--mechanism as a procedure.  Refer also to Al
Petrofsky's posting ``Problems with @emph{curry}'s formal
specification'' for details.

However, the procedural implementation comes with a slight performance
penalty and it is not possible the implement the @func{cut}--mechanism
as a procedure, too.

As both are needed, we rely on macros to implement the @srfi{}.  Why is
there another symbol for the rest--slot when @func{lambda}--expressions
use the dotted notation for variable length argument lists?  There are
two reasons.  The first one is the existence of a procedural
implementation of a related mechanism (refer to the previous paragraph).
For a procedure, however, it is not possible to have dotted notation.
The second reason is the way the hygienic macro mechanism in @rnrs{5} is
defined to deal with dotted notation, as Felix Winkelmann has pointed
out.  Refer to the discussion threads ``Improper lists in macros [WAS:
none]''.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Why is it impossible to specify when a non--slot is evaluate individually per non--slot?

@noindent
@func{cut} evaluates all non--slots at the time the specialized
procedure is called and @func{cute} evaluates all non--slots at the time
the procedure is being specialized.  These are only the two extremes and
it is possible to define a syntax that allows to choose per non--slot.
However, I am convinced that the benefit of the greater flexibility is
not worth the risk of confusion.  If a piece of code really depends on
the distinction, it might be better to make this explicit through
@func{let} and @func{lambda}.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Why is @code{(cut if <> 0 1)} etc. illegal?

@noindent
It is specified that a @code{<slot-or-expr>} must be either the slot
symbol or an @func{<expression>} in the sense of @rnrs{5}, Section
7.1.3.  As if is no @func{<expression>}, the above case is illegal.  The
reason why @func{cut} and @func{cute} are restricted in this sense is
the difficulty of defining the meaning of such generalized expressions.
Please refer to the discussion archive for details.

@c page
@node srfi specialize-procedures ack
@subsection Acknowledgements


An important part of this @srfi{} is based on the contribution of other
people, mostly through the discussion archive.  In particular, the
semantics and the design rationale have been greatly improved in the
course of the discussion.  I would like to thank all who have
contributed.

@c end of file
