@node srfi case-lambda
@section @ansrfi{16} syntax for procedures of variable arity


@cindex @ansrfi{16} case-lambda


The library @library{srfi :16} is by Lars T Hansen as the reference
implementation for @ansrfi{16}; see:

@center @url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-16/srfi-16.html}

@noindent
for more details.

@menu
* srfi case-lambda license::        Case-Lambda document license.
* srfi case-lambda abstract::       Abstract.
* srfi case-lambda rationale::      Rationale.
* srfi case-lambda spec::           Specification.
@end menu

@c page
@node srfi case-lambda license
@subsection Case--lambda document license


Copyright @copyright{} 1999 Lars T Hansen.  All Rights Reserved.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

@c page
@node srfi case-lambda abstract
@subsection Abstract


@func{case-lambda}, a syntax for procedures with a variable number of
arguments, is introduced.

@c page
@node srfi case-lambda rationale
@subsection Rationale


@func{case-lambda} reduces the clutter of procedures that execute
different code depending on the number of arguments they were passed; it
is a pattern--matching mechanism that matches on the number of
arguments.  @func{case-lambda} is available in some Scheme systems.

While @func{case-lambda} can be implemented as a macro using only
facilities available in @rnrs{5} Scheme, it admits considerable
implementation--specific optimization.

@c page
@node srfi case-lambda spec
@subsection Specification


@deffn Syntax case-lambda @var{clause} ...
Eeach @var{clause} has the format @code{(formals body)}, were
@var{formals} is a formal arguments list as for @func{lambda} (cf
section 4.1.4 of the @rnrs{5}).  Each @var{body} is a @code{tail-body}
(cf section 3.5 of the @rnrs{5}).

A @func{case-lambda} expression evaluates to a procedure that accepts a
variable number of arguments and is lexically scoped in the same manner
as procedures resulting from @func{lambda} expressions.

When the procedure is called with some arguments @var{V1}, ...,
@var{Vk}, then the first clause for which the arguments agree with
@var{formals} is selected, where agreement is specified as for the
@var{formals} of a LAMBDA expression.

The variables of @var{formals} are bound to fresh locations, the values
@var{V1}, ..., @var{Vk} are stored in those locations, the @var{body} is
evaluated in the extended environment, and the results of @var{body} are
returned as the results of the procedure call.

It is an error for the arguments not to agree with the @var{formals} of
any @var{clause}.

Error:

@example
(define plus
  (case-lambda
    [()         0]
    [(x)        x]
    [(x y)      (+ x y)]
    [(x y z)    (+ (+ x y) z)]
    [args       (apply + args)]))

(plus)                     => 0
(plus 1)                   => 1
(plus 1 2 3)               => 6

((case-lambda
   [(a)         a]
   [(a b)       (* a b)])
 1 2 3)                    => error
@end example
@end deffn

@c end of file
