@node srfi shared structures
@section @ansrfi{38} representation for data with shared structure


@cindex @ansrfi{38} representation for data with shared structure


The library @library{srfi :38} was written by Ray Dillinger as the
reference implementation for @ansrfi{38}; see:

@center @url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-38/srfi-38.html}

@noindent
for more details.

@menu
* srfi shared structures license::      Original document license.
* srfi shared structures abstract::     Abstract.
* srfi shared structures rationale::    Rationale.
* srfi shared structures spec::         Specification.
@end menu

@c page
@node srfi shared structures license
@subsection Original document license


Copyright @copyright{} 2003 Ray Dillinger.  All Rights Reserved.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

@c page
@node srfi shared structures abstract
@subsection Abstract


This @srfi{} proposes @func{write-with-shared-structure} and
@func{read-with-shared-structure}, procedures for writing and reading
external representations of data containing shared structure.  These
procedures implement a proposed standard external notation for data
containing shared structure.

This @srfi{} permits but does not require replacing the standard
@func{write} and @func{read} functions.  These functions may be
implemented without the overhead in time and space required to detect
and specify shared structure.

An implementation conforms to this @srfi{} if it provides procedures
named @func{write-with-shared-structure} and
@func{read-with-shared-structure}, which produce and read the same
notation as produced by the reference implementation.  It may also
provide @func{read/ss} and @func{write/ss}, equivalent functions with
shorter names.

@c page
@node srfi shared structures rationale
@subsection Rationale


@rnrs{5} scheme and @ieee{} scheme provide the procedure @func{write},
which prints machine--readable representations of lists and other
objects.  However, the printed representation does not preserve
information about what parts of the structure are shared, and in the
case of self--referential objects the behavior of @func{write} itself is
undefined; it is permitted to go into an infinite loop or invoke the
dreaded curse of the nasal demons.

For example, it is possible to have a list within which two or more
members are the same string (in the sense of @func{eq?}), but when the
list is written, there is not sufficient information in the
representation to recover the @func{eq?} relationship.  When the list is
read back in, there will be two or more copies of the string which are
@func{eqv?} but not @func{eq?}.

As an example of the second problem, the results of evaluating:

@example
(begin (define a (cons 'val1 'val2))
       (set-cdr! a a)
       (write a))
@end example

@noindent
are undefined; in @rnrs{5} parlance, calling @func{write} on such a
structure ``is an error'', but not one that is necessarily signalled.
The routine is permitted to print a nonstandard notation such as the one
proposed in this standard or a different one, fail silently, signal an
error, go into an infinite loop, or make demons fly out of your nose.
Some of these results are unacceptable in some cases.  This @srfi{}
hopes to provide a standard way of dealing with this problem by
providing a method of writing data which is guaranteed to be
well--behaved and predictable even on data containing shared structures.

The extended functionality described below in the implementation of
@func{write-with-shared-structure} is already present in the
@func{write} function of several major scheme implementations (PLT,
SISC, Chez, Bigloo, MIT scheme, and possibly others).

@c page
@node srfi shared structures spec
@subsection Specification


@subsubheading Formal Grammar of the New External Representation


This @srfi{} creates an alternative external representation for data
written and read under @func{write/ss} and @func{read/ss}.  It is
identical to the grammar for external representation for data written
and read under @func{write} and @func{read} given in section 7 of
@rnrs{5}, except that the single production:

@example
<datum> --> <simple datum> | <compound datum>
@end example

Is replaced by the following five productions.

@example
<datum> --> <defining datum> | <nondefining datum> | <defined datum>

<defining datum> -->  #<indexnum>=<nondefining datum>

<defined datum> --> #<indexnum>#

<nondefining datum> --> <simple datum> | <compound datum>

<indexnum> --> <digit 10>+
@end example


@subsubheading New Procedures


@deffn Procedure write-with-shared-structure @var{obj}
@deffnx Procedure write-with-shared-structure @var{obj} @var{port}
@deffnx Procedure write-with-shared-structure @var{obj} @var{port} @var{optarg}
Writes a written representation of @var{obj} to the given @var{port}.
Strings that appear in the written representation are enclosed in
doublequotes, and within those strings backslash and doublequote
characters are escaped by backslashes.  Character objects are written
using the @code{#\} notation.

Objects which denote locations rather than values (cons cells, vectors,
and non--zero--length strings in @rnrs{5} scheme; also mutable objects,
records, or containers if provided by the implementation), if they
appear at more than one point in the data being written, must be
preceded by @code{#N=} the first time they are written and replaced by
@code{#N#} all subsequent times they are written, where @var{N} is a
natural number used to identify that particular object.

If objects which denote locations occur only once in the structure, then
@func{write-with-shared-structure} must produce the same external
representation for those objects as @func{write}.

@func{write-with-shared-structure} must terminate in finite time when
writing finite data.  @func{write-with-shared-structure} must produce a
finite representation when writing finite data.

@func{write-with-shared-structure} returns an unspecified value.

The @var{port} argument may be omitted, in which case it defaults to the
value returned by @func{current-output-port}.

The @var{optarg} argument may also be omitted.  If present, its effects
on the output and return value are unspecified but
@func{write-with-shared-structure} must still write a representation
that can be read by @func{read-with-shared-structure}.  Some
implementations may wish to use @var{optarg} to specify formatting
conventions, numeric radixes, or return values.  The reference
implementation ignores optarg.

For example, the code:

@example
(begin (define a (cons 'val1 'val2))
       (set-cdr! a a)
       (write-with-shared-structure a))
@end example

@noindent
should produce the output @code{#1=(val1 . #1#)}.  This shows a cons
cell whose cdr contains itself.
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure read-with-shared-structure
@deffnx Procedure read-with-shared-structure @var{port}
@func{read-with-shared-structure} converts the external representations
of Scheme objects produced by @func{write-with-shared-structure} into
scheme objects.  That is, it is a parser for the nonterminal
@code{<datum>} in the augmented external representation grammar defined
above.

@func{read-with-shared-structure} returns the next object parsable from
the given input port, updating port to point to the first character past
the end of the external representation of the object.

If an end--of--file is encountered in the input before any characters
are found that can begin an object, then an end--of--file object is
returned.  The port remains open, and further attempts to read it (by
@func{read-with-shared-structure} or @func{read}) will also return an
end--of--file object.  If an end--of--file is encountered after the
beginning of an object's external representation, but the external
representation is incomplete and therefore not parsable, an error is
signalled.

The @var{port} argument may be omitted, in which case it defaults to the
value returned by @func{current-input-port}.  It is an error to read
from a closed port.
@end deffn

@c end of file
