@node srfi hash-tables
@section @ansrfi{69} basic hash tables


@cindex @srfi{} basic hash tables


The library @library{srfi :69} is by Andreas Rottmann as the reference
implementation for @ansrfi{39} by Panu Kalliokoski; see:

@center @url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-69/srfi-69.html}

@noindent
for more details.

@menu
* srfi hash-tables abstract::   Abstract.
* srfi hash-tables issues::     Issues.
* srfi hash-tables rationale::  Rationale.
* srfi hash-tables spec::       Specification.
* srfi hash-tables copyright::  Copyright.
@end menu

@c page
@node srfi hash-tables abstract
@subsection Abstract


This @srfi{} defines basic hash tables.  Hash tables are widely
recognised as a fundamental data structure for a wide variety of
applications.  A hash table is a data structure that:

@enumerate
@item
Provides a mapping from some set of keys to some set of values
associated to those keys.

@item
Has no intrinsic order for the (key, value) associations it contains.

@item
Supports in--place modification as the primary means of setting the
contents of a hash table.

@item
Provides key lookup and destructive update in amortised constant time,
provided that a good hash function is used.
@end enumerate

This @srfi{} aims to accomplish these goals:

@enumerate
@item
To provide a consistent, generic and widely applicable @api{} for hash
tables.

@item
To improve code portability by providing a standard hash table facility
with guaranteed behaviour.

@item
To help the programmer by defining utility routines that account for the
most common situations of using hash tables.
@end enumerate

@c page
@node srfi hash-tables issues
@subsection Issues


There is no single best way to make hash tables.  The tables presented
in this @srfi{} aim at being both conceptually simple and usable for a
wide variety of applications.  Even though a portable implementation is
provided, Scheme implementations can speed things up considerably by
e.g. providing an internal hash function for symbols.  Moreover, almost
every Scheme implementation already has some kind of low--level hash
table functionality, because that's the natural way to implement the
global environment, and specifically, to provide support for
@func{string->symbol}.  There might be some benefit in integration
between implementation--specific environment data types and the hash
table @api{} presented here; however, these issues are left open.

This @srfi{} does not conform to the interface of maps presented in
@ansrfi{44}.  Following @ansrfi{44} would seriously cripple the
interface of hash tables.  The naming of the operations for maps in
@ansrfi{44} goes against common use and is unnatural.  However, this
@srfi{} has been written so that it does not prevent a @ansrfi{44}
@api{} to hash tables.  An implementation supporting both @ansrfi{44}
and this @srfi{} is encouraged to provide a @ansrfi{44} interface to
hash tables in addition to the one presented here.

@c page
@node srfi hash-tables rationale
@subsection Rationale


Hash tables are widely recognised as a fundamental data structure for
many kinds of computational tasks.  Thus far, there is no existing
standard for Scheme hash tables; however, almost every non--minimal
Scheme implementation provides some kind of hash table functionality.

Alas, although somewhat similar, these hash table @api{}s have many
differences: some trivial, like the naming of certain functions; some
complex, like revealing different aspects of the internal implementation
to the user; some coarse, like requiring keys to be of some specific
type(s); some subtle, like requiring the user to guess the size of the
hash table in advance to get optimal performance.  As a result, the
existing hash table facilities cannot be used to write portable
programs.

The primary aim of this @srfi{} is to establish a standard @api{} for
hash tables so that portable programs can be written that make efficient
use of common hash table functionality.  The @srfi{} resolves
discrepancies that exist between the various hash table @api{}'s with
respect to naming and semantics of hash table operations.  A lot of
effort has been put into making the the API consistent, simple and
generic.  The @srfi{} also defines some of the most common utility
routines that would otherwise need to be written and rewritten for
various applications.

Incorporating this @srfi{} as a standard feature in Scheme
implementations makes it possible to write efficient and portable
programs that use hash tables.

@c page
@node srfi hash-tables spec
@subsection Specification


@menu
* srfi hash-tables spec names::    Names defined in this @srfi{}.
* srfi hash-tables spec type::     Type constructors and predicate.
* srfi hash-tables spec queries::  Reflective queries.
* srfi hash-tables spec single::   Dealing with single elements.
* srfi hash-tables spec whole::    Dealing with the whole contents.
* srfi hash-tables spec hashing::  Hashing.
@end menu

@c page
@node srfi hash-tables spec names
@subsubsection Names defined in this @srfi{}


Names defined in this @srfi{}:

@table @strong
@item Type constructors and predicate
@example
make-hash-table         hash-table?
alist->hash-table
@end example

@item Reflective queries
@example
hash-table-equivalence-function
hash-table-hash-function
@end example

@item Dealing with single elements
@example
hash-table-ref          hash-table-ref/default
hash-table-set!         hash-table-delete!
hash-table-exists?      hash-table-update!
hash-table-update!/default
@end example

@item Dealing with the whole contents
@example
hash-table-size         hash-table-keys
hash-table-values       hash-table-walk
hash-table-fold         hash-table->alist
hash-table-copy         hash-table-merge!
@end example

@item Hashing
@example
hash                    hash-by-identity
string-hash             string-ci-hash
@end example
@end table

An implementation that does not provide:

@example
hash-table-ref          hash-table-set!
hash-table-delete!      hash-table-update!
hash-table-exists?      hash-table-size
@end example

@noindent
in amortised constant time (when a good hash function is used), or fails
to provide good hash function definitions for:

@example
hash                    string-hash
string-ci-hash          hash-by-identity
@end example

@noindent
does not conform to this @srfi{}.

Hash table implementations are allowed to rely on the fact that the hash
value of a key in hash table does not change.  In most cases, modifying
a key in--place after it has been inserted into the hash table will
violate this constraint and thus leads to unspecified behaviour.

@c page
@node srfi hash-tables spec type
@subsubsection Type constructors and predicate


@defun make-hash-table
@defunx make-hash-table @var{equal?}
@defunx make-hash-table @var{equal?} @var{hash}
@defunx make-hash-table @var{equal?} @var{hash} @var{arg} ...
Create a new hash table with no associations.  @var{equal?} is a
predicate that should accept two keys and return a boolean telling
whether they denote the same key value; it defaults to @func{equal?}.

@var{hash} is a hash function, and defaults to an appropriate hash
function for the given @func{equal?} predicate (@pxref{srfi hash-tables
spec hashing}).  However, an acceptable default is not guaranteed to be
given for any equivalence predicate coarser than @func{equal?}, except
for @func{string-ci=?}.@footnote{An equivalence predicate @vari{C} is
coarser than a equivalence predicate @varii{C} iff there exist values
@var{X} and @var{Y} such that @code{(and (@vari{C} @var{X} @var{Y}) (not
(@varii{C} @var{X} @var{Y})))}.}  The function hash must be acceptable
for @func{equal?}, so if we use coarser equivalence than @func{equal?}
other than @func{string-ci=?}, we must always provide the function
@var{hash} ourself.

Implementations are allowed to use the rest @var{arg}s for
implementation--specific extensions.  Be warned, though, that using
these extensions will make our program less portable.
@end defun


@defun hash-table? @var{obj}
A predicate to test whether a given object @var{obj} is a hash table;
return a boolean.  The hash table type should be disjoint from all other
types, if possible.
@end defun


@defun alist->hash-table @var{alist}
@defunx alist->hash-table @var{alist} @var{equal?}
@defunx alist->hash-table @var{alist} @var{equal?} @var{hash}
@defunx alist->hash-table @var{alist} @var{equal?} @var{hash} @var{arg} ...
Take an ``association list'' @var{alist} and create a hash table
@var{hash-table} which maps the car of every element in @var{alist} to
the cdr of corresponding elements in @var{alist}.

@var{equal?}, @var{hash}, and @var{arg}s are interpreted as in
@func{make-hash-table}.  If some key occurs multiple times in
@var{alist}, the value in the first association will take precedence
over later ones.  (Note: the choice of using cdr (instead of cadr) for
values tries to strike balance between the two approaches: using cadr
would render this procedure unusable for cdr alists, but not vice
versa.)

The rest @var{arg}s are passed to @func{make-hash-table} and can thus be
used for implementation--specific extensions.
@end defun

@c page
@node srfi hash-tables spec queries
@subsubsection Reflective queries


@defun hash-table-equivalence-function @var{hash-table}
Return the equivalence predicate used for keys of @var{hash-table}.
@end defun


@defun hash-table-hash-function @var{hash-table}
Return the hash function used for keys of @var{hash-table}.
@end defun

@c page
@node srfi hash-tables spec single
@subsubsection Dealing with single elements


@defun hash-table-ref @var{hash-table} @var{key}
@defunx hash-table-ref @var{hash-table} @var{key} @var{thunk}
This procedure returns the value associated to @var{key} in
@var{hash-table}.  If no value is associated to @var{key} and
@var{thunk} is given, it is called with no arguments and its value is
returned; if @var{thunk} is not given, an error is signalled.

Given a good hash function, this operation should have an (amortised)
complexity of @math{O(1)} with respect to the number of associations in
@var{hash-table}.

@quotation
@strong{NOTE} This rules out implementation by association lists or
fixed--length hash tables.
@end quotation
@end defun


@defun hash-table-ref/default @var{hash-table} @var{key} @var{default}
Evaluate to the same value as:

@example
(hash-table-ref @var{hash-table} @var{key} (lambda () @var{default}))
@end example

Given a good hash function, this operation should have an (amortised)
complexity of @math{O(1)} with respect to the number of associations in
hash-table.

@quotation
@strong{NOTE} This rules out implementation by association lists or
fixed--length hash tables.
@end quotation
@end defun


@defun hash-table-set! @var{hash-table} @var{key} @var{value}
Set the value associated to @var{key} in @var{hash-table}.  The previous
association (if any) is removed.

Given a good hash function, this operation should have an (amortised)
complexity of @math{O(1)} with respect to the number of associations in
hash-table.

@quotation
@strong{NOTE} This rules out implementation by association lists or
fixed--length hash tables.
@end quotation
@end defun


@defun hash-table-delete! @var{hash-table} @var{key}
Remove any association to key in @var{hash-table}.  It is not an error
if no association for that key exists; in this case, nothing is done.

Given a good hash function, this operation should have an (amortised)
complexity of @math{O(1)} with respect to the number of associations in
hash-table.

@quotation
@strong{NOTE} This rules out implementation by association lists or
fixed--length hash tables.
@end quotation
@end defun


@defun hash-table-exists? @var{hash-table} @var{key}
Tell whether there is any association to @var{key} in @var{hash-table};
return a boolean.

Given a good hash function, this operation should have an (amortised)
complexity of @math{O(1)} with respect to the number of associations in
hash-table.

@quotation
@strong{NOTE} This rules out implementation by association lists or
fixed--length hash tables.
@end quotation
@end defun


@defun hash-table-update! @var{hash-table} @var{key} @var{function}
@defunx hash-table-update! @var{hash-table} @var{key} @var{function} @var{thunk}
Semantically equivalent to, but may be implemented more efficiently
than, the following code:

@example
(hash-table-set! @var{hash-table} @var{key}
  (@var{function} (hash-table-ref @var{hash-table} @var{key} @var{thunk})))
@end example
@end defun


@defun hash-table-update!/default @var{hash-table} @var{key} @var{function} @var{default}
Behave as if it evaluates to:

@example
(hash-table-update! @var{hash-table} @var{key} @var{function}
  (lambda () @var{default}))
@end example
@end defun

@c page
@node srfi hash-tables spec whole
@subsubsection Dealing with the whole contents


@defun hash-table-size @var{hash-table}
Return an exact integer representing the number of associations in
@var{hash-table}.  This operation must have a complexity of @math{O(1)}
with respect to the number of associations in @var{hash-table}.
@end defun


@defun hash-table-keys @var{hash-table}
Return a list of keys in @var{hash-table}.  The order of the keys is
unspecified.
@end defun


@defun hash-table-values @var{hash-table}
Return a list of values in @var{hash-table}.  The order of the values is
unspecified, and is not guaranteed to match the order of keys in the
result of @func{hash-table-keys}.
@end defun


@defun hash-table-walk @var{hash-table} @var{proc}
@var{proc} should be a function taking two arguments, a key and a value.
This procedure calls proc for each association in @var{hash-table},
giving the key of the association as key and the value of the
association as value.  The results of @var{proc} are discarded.  The
order in which proc is called for the different associations is
unspecified.

@quotation
@strong{NOTE} In some implementations, there is a procedure called
@func{hash-table-map} which does the same as this procedure.  However,
in other implementations, @func{hash-table-map} does something else.  In
no implementation that I know of, @func{hash-table-map} does a real
functorial map that lifts an ordinary function to the domain of hash
tables.  Because of these reasons, @func{hash-table-map} is left outside
this @srfi{}.
@end quotation
@end defun


@defun hash-table-fold @var{hash-table} @var{f} @var{init-value}
Call @var{f} for every association in @var{hash-table} with three
arguments:

@enumerate
@item
The key of the association key.

@item
The value of the association value.

@item
An ``accumulated value'', @var{val}.
@end enumerate

@var{val} is @var{init-value} for the first invocation of @var{f}, and,
for subsequent invocations of @var{f}, the return value of the previous
invocation of @var{f}.  The value @var{final-value} returned by
@func{hash-table-fold} is the return value of the last invocation of
@var{f}.  The order in which @var{f} is called for different
associations is unspecified.
@end defun


@defun hash-table->alist @var{hash-table}
Return an association list such that the car of each element in alist is
a key in @var{hash-table} and the corresponding cdr of each element in
alist is the value associated to the key in @var{hash-table}.  The order
of the elements is unspecified.

The following should always produce a hash table with the same mappings
as a hash table @var{H}:

@example
(alist->hash-table (hash-table->alist @var{h})
                   (hash-table-equivalence-function @var{h})
                   (hash-table-hash-function @var{h}))
@end example
@end defun


@defun hash-table-copy @var{hash-table}
Return a new hash table with the same equivalence predicate, hash
function and mappings as in @var{hash-table}.
@end defun


@defun hash-table-merge! @vari{hash-table} @varii{hash-table}
Add all mappings in @varii{hash-table} into @vari{hash-table} and return
the resulting hash table.  This function may modify @vari{hash-table}
destructively.
@end defun

@c page
@node srfi hash-tables spec hashing
@subsubsection Hashing


Hashing means the act of taking some value and producing a number from
the value.  A hash function is a function that does this.  Every
equivalence predicate @var{E} has a set of acceptable hash functions for
that predicate; a hash funtion hash is acceptable iff:

@example
(@var{E} obj1 obj2) @equiv{} (= (hash obj1) (hash obj2))
@end example

A hash function @var{H} is good for a equivalence predicate @var{E} if
it distributes the result numbers (hash values) for non--equal objects
(by @var{E}) as uniformly as possible over the numeric range of hash
values, especially in the case when some (non--equal) objects resemble
each other by e.g. having common subsequences.  This definition is vague
but should be enough to assert that e.g. a constant function is not a
good hash function.

When the definition of @func{make-hash-table} above talks about an
``appropriate'' hashing function for @var{E}, it means a hashing
function that gives decent performance (for the hashing operation) while
being both acceptable and good for @var{E}.  This definition, too, is
intentionally vague.


@defun hash @var{object}
@defunx hash @var{object} @var{bound}
Produce a hash value for object in the range @code{[0, @var{bound})}.
If @var{bound} is not given, the implementation is free to choose any
bound, given that the default bound is greater than the size of any
imaginable hash table in a normal application.  (This is so that the
implementation may choose some very big value in fixnum range for the
default bound.)  This hash function is acceptable for @func{equal?}.
@end defun


@defun string-hash @var{string}
@defunx string-hash @var{string} @var{bound}
The same as @func{hash}, except that the argument string must be a
string.
@end defun


@defun string-ci-hash @var{string}
@defunx string-ci-hash @var{string} @var{bound}
The same as @func{string-hash}, except that the case of characters in
string does not affect the hash value produced.
@end defun


@defun hash-by-identity @var{object}
@defunx hash-by-identity @var{object} @var{bound}
The same as @func{hash}, except that this function is only guaranteed to
be acceptable for @func{eq?}.  The reason for providing this function is
that it might be implemented significantly more efficiently than
@func{hash}.  Implementations are encouraged to provide this function as
a builtin.
@end defun

@c page
@node srfi hash-tables copyright
@subsection Copyright


Copyright @copyright{} Panu Kalliokoski (2005).  All Rights Reserved.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND
NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE
LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION
OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION
WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

