@node srfi environment-variables
@section @ansrfi{98} environment variables


@cindex @ansrfi{98} environment variables


The library @library{srfi :98} is by Taro Minowa (Higepon) as the
reference implementation for @ansrfi{98}; see:

@center @url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-98/srfi-98.html}

@noindent
for more details.

@menu
* srfi environment-variables license::    Original document license.
* srfi environment-variables abstract::   Abstract.
* srfi environment-variables rationale::  Rationale.
* srfi environment-variables spec::       Specification.
* srfi environment-variables issues::     Issues.
* srfi environment-variables ack::        Acknowledgements.
@end menu

@c page
@node srfi environment-variables license
@subsection Original document license


Copyright @copyright{} 2008 Taro Minowa (Higepon).  All Rights Reserved.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

@c page
@node srfi environment-variables abstract
@subsection Abstract


This @srfi{} specifies the procedure @func{get-environment-variable},
which gets the value of the specified environment variable, and the
procedure @func{get-environment-variables}, which gets an association
list of all environment-variables.

@c page
@node srfi environment-variables rationale
@subsection Rationale


Most operating systems provide a mechanism for passing auxiliary
parameters implicitly to child processes.  Usually, this mechanism is
called ``the environment'', and is conceptually a map from string names
to string values.  The string names are called environment variables.

Some applications rely on environment variables to modify their behavior
according to local settings.  Also, various established protocols rely
on environment variables as a form of interprocess communication.  For
example, most implementations of the common gateway interface
(@acronym{CGI}) use environment variables to pass Meta--Variables from
the server to the script.  Environment variables are also required by
@ansrfi{96} @acronym{SLIB} Prerequisites.  Providing a means to access
environment variables is therefore indispensable for writing practical
programs in Scheme.

Most widely--used Scheme implementations provide a function for getting
the value of a specified environment variable.  The name for this
function is usually getenv, but varies (see below).  Some
implementations also provide a way to get all the environment variables,
but others do not.

This @srfi{} specifies a uniform interface for accessing environment
variables.  That should make it easier to write portable programs that
need access to their environment.  For example, a @acronym{CGI} program
may portably obtain the values of the Meta--Variables
@env{QUERY_STRING}, @env{CONTENT_LENGTH} and @env{REQUEST_METHOD} as in
the following examples:

@example
(get-environment-variable "QUERY_STRING") => "foo=bar&huga=hige"
(get-environment-variable "CONTENT_LENGTH") => "512"
(get-environment-variable "REQUEST_METHOD") => "post"
@end example

@c page
@node srfi environment-variables spec
@subsection Specification


The following two procedures belong to the @rnrs{6} library named
@library{system}.  This is a provisional library name until the naming
rules for @rnrs{6} @srfi{} libraries are specified.

@deffn Procedure get-environment-variable @var{name}
Return the value of the named environment variable as a string, or
@false{} if the named environment variable is not found.  The name
argument is expected to be a string.  @func{get-environment-variable}
may use locale--setting information to encode the name and decode the
value of the environment variable.  If @func{get-environment-variable}
can't decode the value, @func{get-environment-variable} may raise an
exception.

@example
(get-environment-variable "PATH")
=> "/usr/local/sbin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin"
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Procedure get-environment-variables
Return names and values of all the environment variables as an alist.
The same decoding considerations as for @func{get-environment-variable}
apply.

@example
(get-environment-variables)
=> (("PATH" . "/usr/local/sbin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin")
    ("USERNAME" . "taro"))
@end example
@end deffn

@c page
@node srfi environment-variables issues
@subsection Issues


@func{get-environment-variable} is expected to return a ``Scheme
string''.

Unfortunately, many current platforms, including @posix{}--like ones, do
not require environment variables to be interpretable as sequences of
characters.  In particular, environment variables can be used to name
files, and filenames on the system can amount to @code{NULL}--terminated
byte vectors, which, if the Scheme program were to collect uninterpreted
and pass to, say, the open call, would work just fine, but which might
not represent a string in the particular encoding the program expects.

While in principle it may be desirable to provide a mechanism for
accessing environment variables raw, this @srfi{} specifies a ``string''
return type because that best represents the consensus of existing
implementations, and captures the semantically desirable behavior in the
common case that the byte sequence is interpretable as a string.

@c page
@node srfi environment-variables ack
@subsection Acknowledgements


Thanks to Shiro Kawai, Alexey Radul, jmuk, Kokosabu, leque and all the
members of the @code{#Lisp_Scheme} @acronym{IRC} channel on Freenode.

@c end of file
