@node srfi parameters
@section @ansrfi{39} parameter objects


@cindex @ansrfi{39} parameters


The library @library{srfi :39} is by Marc Feeley as the reference
implementation for @ansrfi{39}; see:

@center @url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-39/srfi-39.html}

@noindent
for more details.

@menu
* srfi parameters license::     Parameters document license.
* srfi parameters abstract::    Abstract.
* srfi parameters rationale::   Rationale.
* srfi parameters spec::        Specification.
@end menu

@c page
@node srfi parameters license
@subsection Parameters document license


Copyright @copyright{} 2002 Marc Feeley.  All Rights Reserved.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

@c page
@node srfi parameters abstract
@subsection Abstract


This @srfi{} defines parameter objects, the procedure
@func{make-parameter} to create parameter objects and the
@func{parameterize} special form to dynamically bind parameter objects.

In the dynamic environment, each parameter object is bound to a cell
containing the value of the parameter.  When a procedure is called the
called procedure inherits the dynamic environment from the caller.  The
@func{parameterize} special form allows the binding of a parameter
object to be changed for the dynamic extent of its body.

@c page
@node srfi parameters rationale
@subsection Rationale


The @emph{dynamic environment} is the structure which allows the system
to find the value returned by the @rnrs{5} procedures
@func{current-input-port} and @func{current-output-port}.  The @rnrs{5}
procedures @func{with-input-from-file} and @func{with-output-to-file}
extend the dynamic environment to produce a new dynamic environment
which is in effect for the dynamic extent of the call to the thunk
passed as their last argument.

These procedures are essentially special purpose dynamic binding
operations on hidden dynamic variables (one for
@func{current-input-port} and one for @func{current-output-port}).  The
purpose of this @srfi{} is to generalize this dynamic binding mechanism
(which exists in all @rnrs{5} compliant systems) to allow the user to
introduce new dynamic variables and dynamically bind them.

General dynamic binding mechanisms exist in several implementations of
Scheme under various names, including ``fluid'' variables and parameter
objects.  The parameter objects specified in this @srfi{} are
compatible with the semantics of all implementations of Scheme we know
which currently support parameter objects (in the sense that it is
possible to implement this @srfi{} so that old code works the same as
before).  We believe Chez--Scheme was the first implementation of Scheme
to have used parameter objects.

In the presence of threads, the dynamic binding mechanism does not
behave the same way in all implementations of Scheme supporting dynamic
binding.  The issue is the relationship between the dynamic environments
of the parent and child threads when a thread is created.  In Scheme 48
the child gets a fresh dynamic environment where (typically but not
necessarily) all the bindings are to their initial value.

In MzScheme and Gambit--C the child is given a dynamic environment
inherited from the parent.  In this inherited dynamic environment the
dynamic variables have the same values as the parent's dynamic
environment.  However, in MzScheme the cells bound to the dynamic
variables in the child are distinct from those of the parent (i.e. an
assignment of a value to a dynamic variable is not visible in the other
thread).  In Gambit--C the child and parent dynamic environment share
the same cells (i.e. an assignment of a value to a dynamic variable is
visible in the other thread).  Note that in the absence of assignment to
dynamic variables the MzScheme and Gambit--C approaches are equivalent.

Given that there are semantic differences in the presence of threads and
that there are valid reasons for choosing each semantics, this @srfi{}
does not specify the semantics of parameter objects in the presence of
threads.  It is left to the implementation and other @srfi{}s which
extend this @srfi{} to specify the interaction between parameter
objects and threads.

@c page
@node srfi parameters spec
@subsection Specification


The @emph{dynamic environment} is composed of two parts: the @emph{local
dynamic environment} and the @emph{global dynamic environment}.  The
global dynamic environment is used to lookup parameter objects that
can't be found in the local dynamic environment.  When parameter objects
are created, their initial binding is put in the global dynamic
environment (by mutation).  The local dynamic environment is only
extended by the @func{parameterize} form.

@emph{Parameter objects} are created with the @func{make-parameter}
procedure which takes one or two arguments.  The second argument is a
one argument conversion procedure.  If only one argument is passed to
@func{make-parameter} the identity function is used as a conversion
procedure.  The global dynamic environment is updated to associate the
parameter object to a new cell.  The initial content of the cell is the
result of applying the conversion procedure to the first argument of
@func{make-parameter}.

A @emph{parameter object} is a procedure which accepts zero or one
argument.  The cell bound to a particular parameter object in the
dynamic environment is accessed by calling the parameter object.  When
no argument is passed, the content of the cell is returned.  When one
argument is passed the content of the cell is updated with the result of
applying the parameter object's conversion procedure to the argument.

The @func{parameterize} special form, when given a parameter object and
a value, binds for the dynamic extent of its body the parameter object
to a new cell.  The initial content of the cell is the result of
applying the parameter object's conversion procedure to the value.  The
parameterize special form behaves analogously to let when binding more
than one parameter object (that is the order of evaluation is
unspecified and the new bindings are only visible in the body of the
parameterize special form).

Note that the conversion procedure can be used for guaranteeing the type
of the parameter object's binding and/or to perform some conversion of
the value.

Because it is possible to implement the @rnrs{5} procedures
@func{current-input-port} and @func{current-output-port} as parameter
objects and this offers added functionnality, it is required by this
@srfi{} that they be implemented as parameter objects created with
@func{make-parameter}.


@defun make-parameter @var{init} [@var{converter}]
Returns a new parameter object which is bound in the global dynamic
environment to a cell containing the value returned by the call
@code{(converter init)}.  If the conversion procedure converter is not
specified the identity function is used instead.

The parameter object is a procedure which accepts zero or one argument.
When it is called with no argument, the content of the cell bound to
this parameter object in the current dynamic environment is returned.
When it is called with one argument, the content of the cell bound to
this parameter object in the current dynamic environment is set to the
result of the call @code{(converter arg)}, where @var{arg} is the
argument passed to the parameter object, and an unspecified value is
returned.

@example
(define radix
  (make-parameter 10))

(define write-shared
  (make-parameter #f
    (lambda (x)
      (if (boolean? x)
          x
        (error "only booleans are accepted by write-shared")))))

(radix)           =>  10
(radix 2)
(radix)           =>  2
(write-shared 0)  gives an error

(define prompt
  (make-parameter 123
    (lambda (x)
      (if (string? x)
          x
        (with-output-to-string (lambda () (write x)))))))

(prompt)       =>  "123"
(prompt ">")
(prompt)       =>  ">"
@end example
@end defun


@deffn Syntax parameterize ((@var{expr1} @var{expr2}) ...) @var{body})
The expressions @var{expr1} and @var{expr2} are evaluated in an
unspecified order.  The value of the @var{expr1} expressions must be
parameter objects.  For each @var{expr1} expression and in an
unspecified order, the local dynamic environment is extended with a
binding of the parameter object @var{expr1} to a new cell whose content
is the result of the call @code{(converter val)}, where @var{val} is the
value of @var{expr2} and @var{converter} is the conversion procedure of
the parameter object.

The resulting dynamic environment is then used for the evaluation of
@var{body} (which refers to the @rnrs{5} grammar nonterminal of that
name).  The result(s) of the parameterize form are the result(s) of the
@var{body}.

With reference to thte example above:

@example
(radix)
=>  2

(parameterize ([radix 16])
  (radix))
=>  16

(radix)
=>  2

(define (f n)
  (number->string n (radix)))

(f 10)
=>  "1010"

(parameterize ([radix 8])
  (f 10))
=>  "12"

(parameterize ([radix 8]
               [prompt (f 10)])
  (prompt))
=>  "1010"
@end example
@end deffn

@c end of file
