@node srfi records
@section @ansrfi{9} defining record types


@cindex @ansrfi{9} defining record types
@cindex @library{srfi :9}, library
@cindex @library{srfi :9 records}, library
@cindex Library @library{srfi :9}
@cindex Library @library{srfi :9 records}


The library @library{srfi :9} is by Richard Kelsey as the reference
implementation for @ansrfi{9}; see:

@center @url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-9/srfi-9.html}

@noindent
for more details.

@menu
* srfi records license::        Records document license.
* srfi records abstract::       Abstract.
* srfi records rationale::      Rationale.
* srfi records spec::           Specification.
@end menu

@c page
@node srfi records license
@subsection Records document license


Copyright @copyright{} 1999 Richard Kelsey.  All Rights Reserved.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

@c page
@node srfi records abstract
@subsection Abstract


This @srfi{} describes syntax for creating new data types, called
record types.  A predicate, a constructor, and field accessors and
modifiers are defined for each record type.  Each new record type is
distinct from all existing types, including other record types and
Scheme's predefined types.

@c page
@node srfi records rationale
@subsection Rationale


Many Scheme implementations provide means for creating new types,
usually called either records or structures.  The
@func{DEFINE-RECORD-TYPE} syntax described here is a slight
simplification of one written for Scheme 48 by Jonathan Rees.  Unlike
many record--defining macros or special forms, it does not create any
new identifiers.  Instead, the names of the record type, predicate,
constructor, and so on are all listed explicitly in the source.  This
has the following advantages:

@itemize
@item
It can be defined using a simple @func{syntax-rules} macro in Scheme
implementations that provide a procedural interface for creating record
types.

@item
It does not restrict users to a particular naming convention.

@item
Tools like grep and @gnu{} Emacs's tag facility will see the defining
occurance of each identifier.
@end itemize

@c page
@node srfi records spec
@subsection Specification


@cindex @srfi{} record @api{}
@findex define-record-type


The syntax of a record--type definition is:

@example
<command or definition>
  -> <record type definition>           ; addition to 8.1.6 in R5RS

<record type definition>
  -> (define-record-type <type name>
       (<constructor name> <field tag> ...)
       <predicate name>
       <field spec> ...)

<field spec> -> (<field tag> <accessor name>)
             -> (<field tag> <accessor name> <modifier name>)

<field tag> -> <identifier>
<... name>  -> <identifier>
@end example

@func{define-record-type} is generative: each use creates a new record
type that is distinct from all existing types, including other record
types and Scheme's predefined types.  Record--type definitions may only
occur at top--level (there are two possible semantics for ``internal''
record--type definitions, generative and nongenerative, and no consensus
as to which is better).

An instance of @func{define-record-type} is equivalent to the following
definitions:

@itemize
@item
@code{<type name>} is bound to a representation of the record type
itself.  Operations on record types, such as defining print methods,
reflection, etc. are left to other @srfi{}s.

@item
@code{<constructor name>} is bound to a procedure that takes as many
arguments as there are @code{<field tag>}s in the @code{(<constructor
name> ...)}  subform and returns a new @code{<type name>} record.
Fields whose tags are listed with @code{<constructor name>} have the
corresponding argument as their initial value.  The initial values of
all other fields are unspecified.

@item
@code{<predicate name>} is a predicate that returns @true{} when given a
value returned by @code{<constructor name>} and @false{} for everything
else.

@item
Each @code{<accessor name>} is a procedure that takes a record of type
@code{<type name>} and returns the current value of the corresponding
field.  It is an error to pass an accessor a value which is not a record
of the appropriate type.

@item
Each @code{<modifier name>} is a procedure that takes a record of type
@code{<type name>} and a value which becomes the new value of the
corresponding field; an unspecified value is returned.  It is an error
to pass a modifier a first argument which is not a record of the
appropriate type.
@end itemize

Records are disjoint from the types listed in Section 4.2 of @rnrs{5}.

@func{set!}--ing the value of any of these identifiers has no effect on
the behavior of any of their original values.

The following:

@example
(define-record-type :pare
  (kons x y)
  pare?
  (x kar set-kar!)
  (y kdr))
@end example

@noindent
defines @var{kons} to be a constructor, @var{kar} and @var{kdr} to be
accessors, @var{set-kar!} to be a modifier, and @var{pare?} to be a
predicate for @code{:pare}s.

Example:

@example
(pare? (kons 1 2))        => #t
(pare? (cons 1 2))        => #f
(kar (kons 1 2))          => 1
(kdr (kons 1 2))          => 2
(let ([k (kons 1 2)])
  (set-kar! k 3)
  (kar k))                => 3
@end example

@c end of file
