@node srfi cond-expand
@section @ansrfi{0} feature based conditional expansion construct


@cindex @ansrfi{0} feature based conditional expansion construct


The library @library{srfi :0} is by Marc Feeley as reference
implementation for @ansrfi{0}; see:

@center @url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-0/srfi-0.html}

@noindent
for more details.

@menu
* srfi cond-expand license::    Original document license.
* srfi cond-expand abstract::   Abstract.
* srfi cond-expand rationale::  Rationale.
* srfi cond-expand spec::       Specifications.
* srfi cond-expand vicare::     Features supported by @value{PRJNAME}.
@end menu

@c page
@node srfi cond-expand license
@subsection Original document license


Copyright @copyright{} Marc Feeley 1999.  All Rights Reserved.

This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it or
assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published and
distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any kind,
provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are included
on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this document itself
may not be modified in any way, such as by removing the copyright notice
or references to the Scheme Request For Implementation process or
editors, except as needed for the purpose of developing SRFIs in which
case the procedures for copyrights defined in the SRFI process must be
followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
English.

The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
revoked by the authors or their successors or assigns.

This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
``AS IS'' basis and THE AUTHOR AND THE SRFI EDITORS DISCLAIM ALL
WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY
WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY
RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

@c page
@node srfi cond-expand abstract
@subsection Abstract


It is desirable that programs which depend on additions to standard
Scheme name those additions.  @srfi{}s provide the specifications of
these additions (``features''), and @ansrfi{0} provides the means to
actually check that these features are present in the Scheme system by
means of the @func{cond-expand} construct.  It is anticipated that there
will be two main classes of features:

@itemize
@item
sets of value and syntax bindings;

@item
reader syntax extensions;
@end itemize

@noindent
``reader syntax'' refers to aspects of the syntax described by the
grammars in the Scheme reports.

The former class of features will probably include most @srfi{}s,
exemplified by the list library specified in @ansrfi{1}.  The latter class
includes Unicode source code support and different kinds of parentheses.

Control over the presence of individual features will vary over
different Scheme systems.  A given feature may be absent or provided by
default in some Scheme systems and in others some mechanism (such as an
@func{import} clause in the code or a program configuration file, a
command line option, a dependency declaration in a module definition,
etc.) will be required for the feature to be present in the system.

Moreover, in some systems a given feature may be in effect throughout
the entire program if it is in effect anywhere at all.  Other systems
may have more precise mechanisms to control the scope of a feature (this
might be the case for example when a module system is supported).  In
general it is thus possible that a feature is in effect in some parts of
the program and not in others.  This allows conflicting @srfi{}s to be
present in a given program as long as their scope do not intersect.

@ansrfi{0} does not prescribe a particular mechanism for controlling the
presence of a feature as it is our opinion that this should be the role
of a module system.  We expect that future module system @srfi{}s will
need to extend the semantics of @ansrfi{0} for their purposes, for
example by defining feature scoping rules or by generalizing the feature
testing construct.

@c page
@node srfi cond-expand rationale
@subsection Rationale


Most Scheme systems extend the language with some additional features
(such as the ability to manipulate Unicode characters and strings, to do
binary I/O, or to handle asynchronous interrupts).  Such features may be
provided in a variety of ways including new procedures, new program
syntax, and extended behavior of standard procedures and special--forms.

A particular functionality may exist in several or even most Scheme
systems but its @api{} may be different (use of a procedure or
special--form, name, number of parameters, etc).  To write code that
will run on several Scheme systems, it is useful to have a common
construct to enable or disable sections of code based on the existence
or absence of a feature in the Scheme system being used.  For example,
the construct could be used to check if a particular binary I/O
procedure is present, and if not, load a portable library which
implements that procedure.

Features are identified by feature identifiers.  In order for the
semantics of this construct to be well--defined, the feature identifier
must of course refer to a feature which has a well--defined meaning.
There is thus a need for a registry, independent of this @srfi{}, to
keep track of the formal specification associated with each valid
feature--identifier.  The @srfi{} registry is used for this purpose.
It is expected that features will eventually be assigned meaningful
names (aliases) by the @srfi{} editors to make reading and writing code
less tedious than when using @code{srfi-N} feature identifiers.

Another issue is the binding time of this construct (i.e.  the moment
when it operates).  It is important that the binding time be early so
that a compiler can discard the sections of code that are not needed,
and perform better static analyses.  Expressing this construct through a
procedure returning a boolean, such as:

@example
(feature-implemented? 'srfi-5)
@end example

@noindent
would not achieve this goal, as its binding time is too late
(i.e. program run--time).  A read--time construct, such as Common Lisp's
@code{#+} read-macro, is very early but would require non--trivial
changes to the reader of existing Scheme systems and the syntax is not
particularly human friendly.  Instead, a macro--expansion--time
construct is used.

The construct is restricted to the top level of a program in order to
simplify its implementation and to force a more disciplined use of the
construct (to facilitate reading and understanding programs) and to
avoid (some) misunderstandings related to the scope of features.  These
restrictions can of course be lifted by some Scheme systems or by other
@srfi{}s (in particular module system @srfi{}s).

@c page
@node srfi cond-expand spec
@subsection Specifications


@findex cond-expand


Syntax:

@example
<command or definition>
    --> <command>
      | <definition>
      | <syntax definition>
      | (begin <command or definition>+)
      | <conditional expansion form>
<conditional expansion form>
    --> (cond-expand <cond-expand clause>+)
      | (cond-expand <cond-expand clause>*
                     (else <command or definition>*))
<cond-expand clause>
    --> (<feature requirement> <command or definition>*)
<feature requirement>
    --> <feature identifier>
      | (and <feature requirement>*)
      | (or <feature requirement>*)
      | (not <feature requirement>)
<feature identifier>
    --> a symbol which is the name or alias of a SRFI
@end example

The @func{cond-expand} form tests for the existence of features at
macro--expansion time.  It either expands into the body of one of its
clauses or signals an error during syntactic processing.
@func{cond-expand} expands into the body of the first clause whose
feature requirement is currently satisfied (the else clause, if present,
is selected if none of the previous clauses is selected).

A feature requirement has an obvious interpretation as a logical
formula, where the @code{<feature identifier>} variables have meaning
TRUE if the feature corresponding to the feature identifier, as
specified in the @srfi{} registry, is in effect at the location of the
@func{cond-expand} form, and FALSE otherwise.  A feature requirement is
satisfied if its formula is true under this interpretation.

Examples:

@example
(cond-expand
  ((and srfi-1 srfi-10)
   (write 1))
  ((or srfi-1 srfi-10)
   (write 2))
  (else))

(cond-expand
  (command-line
   (define (program-name) (car (argv)))))
@end example

The second example assumes that @func{command-line} is an alias for some
feature which gives access to command line arguments.  Note that an
error will be signaled at macro--expansion time if this feature is not
present.

@c page
@node srfi cond-expand vicare
@subsection Features supported by @value{PRJNAME}


The following symbolic expressions are recognised by @func{cond-expand}
as @value{PRJNAME} available features:

@table @code
@item (srfi :0)
@itemx (srfi :0 cond-expand)
@itemx srfi-0
@itemx srfi-0-cond-expand
@ansrfi{0} is available.

@item (srfi :1)
@itemx (srfi :1 lists)
@itemx srfi-1
@itemx srfi-1-lists
@ansrfi{1} is available.

@item (srfi :2)
@itemx (srfi :2 and-let*)
@itemx srfi-2
@itemx srfi-2-and-let*
@ansrfi{2} is available.

@c @item (srfi :5)
@c @itemx (srfi :5 let)
@c @itemx srfi-5
@c @itemx srfi-5-let
@c @ansrfi{5} is available.

@item (srfi :6)
@itemx (srfi :6 basic-string-ports)
@itemx srfi-6
@itemx srfi-6-basic-string-ports
@ansrfi{6} is available.

@item (srfi :8)
@itemx (srfi :8 receive)
@itemx srfi-8
@itemx srfi-8-receive
@ansrfi{8} is available.

@item (srfi :9)
@itemx (srfi :9 records)
@itemx srfi-9
@itemx srfi-9-records
@ansrfi{9} is available.

@item (srfi :11)
@itemx (srfi :11 let-values)
@itemx srfi-11
@itemx srfi-11-let-values
@ansrfi{11} is available.

@item (srfi :13)
@itemx (srfi :13 strings)
@itemx srfi-13
@itemx srfi-13-strings
@ansrfi{13} is available.

@item (srfi :14)
@itemx (srfi :14 char-sets)
@itemx srfi-14
@itemx srfi-14-char-sets
@ansrfi{14} is available.

@item (srfi :16)
@itemx (srfi :16 case-lambda)
@itemx srfi-16
@itemx srfi-16-case-lambda
@ansrfi{16} is available.

@c @item (srfi :17)
@c @itemx (srfi :17 generalized-set!)
@c @itemx srfi-17
@c @itemx srfi-17-generalized-set!
@c @ansrfi{17} is available.

@c @item (srfi :18)
@c @itemx (srfi :18 multithreading)
@c @itemx srfi-18
@c @itemx srfi-18-multithreading
@c @ansrfi{18} is available.

@item (srfi :19)
@itemx (srfi :19 time)
@itemx srfi-19
@itemx srfi-19-time
@ansrfi{19} is available.

@c @item (srfi :21)
@c @itemx (srfi :21 real-time-multithreading)
@c @itemx srfi-21
@c @itemx srfi-21-real-time-multithreading
@c @ansrfi{21} is available.

@item (srfi :23)
@itemx (srfi :23 error)
@itemx srfi-23
@itemx srfi-23-error
@ansrfi{23} is available.

@item (srfi :25)
@itemx (srfi :25 multi-dimensional-arrays)
@itemx srfi-25
@itemx srfi-25-multi-dimensional-arrays
@ansrfi{25} is available.

@item (srfi :26)
@itemx (srfi :26 cut)
@itemx srfi-26
@itemx srfi-26-cut
@ansrfi{26} is available.

@item (srfi :27)
@itemx (srfi :27 random-bits)
@itemx srfi-27
@itemx srfi-27-random-bits
@ansrfi{27} is available.

@c @item (srfi :28)
@c @itemx (srfi :28 basic-format-strings)
@c @itemx srfi-28
@c @itemx srfi-28-basic-format-strings
@c @ansrfi{28} is available.

@c @item (srfi :29)
@c @itemx (srfi :29 localization)
@c @itemx srfi-29
@c @itemx srfi-29-localization
@ansrfi{29} is available.

@item (srfi :31)
@itemx (srfi :31 rec)
@itemx srfi-31
@itemx srfi-31-rec
@ansrfi{31} is available.

@item (srfi :37)
@itemx (srfi :37 args-fold)
@itemx srfi-37
@itemx srfi-37-args-fold
@ansrfi{37} is available.

@item (srfi :38)
@itemx (srfi :38 with-shared-structure)
@itemx srfi-38
@itemx srfi-38-with-shared-structure
@ansrfi{38} is available.

@item (srfi :39)
@itemx (srfi :39 parameters)
@itemx srfi-39
@itemx srfi-39-parameters
@ansrfi{39} is available.

@item (srfi :41)
@itemx (srfi :41 streams)
@itemx srfi-41
@itemx srfi-41-streams
@ansrfi{41} is available.

@item (srfi :42)
@itemx (srfi :42 eager-comprehensions)
@itemx srfi-42
@itemx srfi-42-eager-comprehensions
@ansrfi{42} is available.

@item (srfi :43)
@itemx (srfi :43 vectors)
@itemx srfi-43
@itemx srfi-43-vectors
@ansrfi{43} is available.

@c @item (srfi :44)
@c @itemx (srfi :44 collections)
@c @itemx srfi-44
@c @itemx srfi-44-collections
@c @ansrfi{44} is available.

@item (srfi :45)
@itemx (srfi :45 lazy)
@itemx srfi-45
@itemx srfi-45-lazy
@ansrfi{45} is available.

@c @item (srfi :46)
@c @itemx (srfi :46 syntax-rules)
@c @itemx srfi-46
@c @itemx srfi-46-syntax-rules
@c @ansrfi{46} is available.

@c @item (srfi :47)
@c @itemx (srfi :47 arrays)
@c @itemx srfi-47
@c @itemx srfi-47-arrays
@c @ansrfi{47} is available.

@item (srfi :48)
@itemx (srfi :48 intermediate-format-strings)
@itemx srfi-48
@itemx srfi-48-intermediate-format-strings
@ansrfi{48} is available.

@c @item (srfi :51)
@c @itemx (srfi :51 rest-values)
@c @itemx srfi-51
@c @itemx srfi-51-rest-values
@c @ansrfi{51} is available.

@c @item (srfi :54)
@c @itemx (srfi :54 cat)
@c @itemx srfi-54
@c @itemx srfi-54-cat
@c @ansrfi{54} is available.

@c @item (srfi :57)
@c @itemx (srfi :57 records)
@c @itemx srfi-57
@c @itemx srfi-57-records
@c @ansrfi{57} is available.

@c @item (srfi :59)
@c @itemx (srfi :59 vicinities)
@c @itemx srfi-59
@c @itemx srfi-59-vicinities
@c @ansrfi{59} is available.

@c @item (srfi :60)
@c @itemx (srfi :60 integer-bits)
@c @itemx srfi-60
@c @itemx srfi-60-integer-bits
@c @ansrfi{60} is available.

@item (srfi :61)
@itemx (srfi :61 cond)
@itemx srfi-61
@itemx srfi-61-cond
@ansrfi{61} is available.

@c @item (srfi :63)
@c @itemx (srfi :63 arrays)
@c @itemx srfi-63
@c @itemx srfi-63-arrays
@c @ansrfi{63} is available.

@item (srfi :64)
@itemx (srfi :64 testing)
@itemx srfi-64
@itemx srfi-64-testing
@ansrfi{64} is available.

@c @item (srfi :66)
@c @itemx (srfi :66 octet-vectors)
@c @itemx srfi-66
@c @itemx srfi-66-octet-vectors
@c @ansrfi{66} is available.

@item (srfi :67)
@itemx (srfi :67 compare-procedures)
@itemx srfi-67
@itemx srfi-67-compare-procedures
@ansrfi{67} is available.

@item (srfi :69)
@itemx (srfi :69 basic-hash-tables)
@itemx srfi-69
@itemx srfi-69-basic-hash-tables
@ansrfi{69} is available.

@c @item (srfi :71)
@c @itemx (srfi :71 let)
@c @itemx srfi-71
@c @itemx srfi-71-let
@c @ansrfi{71} is available.

@c @item (srfi :74)
@c @itemx (srfi :74 blobs)
@c @itemx srfi-74
@c @itemx srfi-74-blobs
@c @ansrfi{74} is available.

@item (srfi :78)
@itemx (srfi :78 lightweight-testing)
@itemx srfi-78
@itemx srfi-78-lightweight-testing
@ansrfi{78} is available.

@c @item (srfi :86)
@c @itemx (srfi :86 mu-and-nu)
@c @itemx srfi-86
@c @itemx srfi-86-mu-and-nu
@c @ansrfi{86} is available.

@c @item (srfi :87)
@c @itemx (srfi :87 case)
@c @itemx srfi-87
@c @itemx srfi-87-case
@c @ansrfi{87} is available.

@c @item (srfi :95)
@c @itemx (srfi :95 sorting-and-merging)
@c @itemx srfi-95
@c @itemx srfi-95-sorting-and-merging
@c @ansrfi{95} is available.

@item (srfi :98)
@itemx (srfi :98 os-environment-variables)
@itemx srfi-98
@itemx srfi-98-os-environment-variables
@ansrfi{98} is available.

@item (srfi :99)
@itemx (srfi :99 records)
@itemx srfi-99
@itemx srfi-99-records
@ansrfi{99} is available.

@item vicare
The Scheme implementation is @value{PRJNAME}.

@item posix
The program is running under a @posix{} system.

@itemx linux
@itemx solaris
@itemx darwin
@itemx bsd
@itemx freebsd
@itemx openbsd
@itemx cygwin
@itemx gnu
The program is running under the named @acronym{OS}.
@end table

@c end of file
