@node srfi comparators
@section @ansrfi{114} comparators


@cindex @ansrfi{114} comparators
@cindex @library{srfi :114}, library
@cindex @library{srfi :114 comparators}, library
@cindex Library @library{srfi :114}
@cindex Library @library{srfi :114 comparators}


The libraries @library{srfi :114} and @library{srfi :114 comparators}
are derived from the reference implementation of @ansrfi{114} by John
Cowan; see:

@center @url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-114/srfi-114.html}

@noindent
for more details.  @library{srfi :114} and @library{srfi :114
comparators} export the same bindings.

@menu
* srfi comparators abstract::     Abstract.
* srfi comparators rationale::    Rationale.
* srfi comparators definitions::  Definitions.
* srfi comparators limitations::  Limitations.
* srfi comparators predicates::   Predicates.
* srfi comparators standard::     Standard comparators.
* srfi comparators default::      The default comparator.
* srfi comparators constructors:: Comparator constructors.
* srfi comparators wrapped::      Wrapped equality predicates.
* srfi comparators accessors::    Accessors.
* srfi comparators applicators::  Primitive applicators.
* srfi comparators compar proc::  Comparison procedure constructors.
* srfi comparators syntax::       Comparison syntax.
* srfi comparators compar pred::  Comparison predicates and predicate
                                  constructors.
* srfi comparators ternary::      Interval comparison predicates.
* srfi comparators minmax::       Min/max comparison procedures.
* srfi comparators misc::         Miscellaneous procedures.
* srfi comparators conditions::   Condition object types.
* srfi comparators copyright::    Copyright.
@end menu

@c page
@node srfi comparators abstract
@subsection Abstract


This proposal is a rewrite of @ansrfi{67}, Compare Procedures, extending
it from procedures that represent a total order to procedure bundles
that represent one or more of a total order, an equality predicate, and
a hash function.  By packaging these procedures together, along with a
type test predicate, they can be treated as a single item for use in the
implementation of data structures.

@c page
@node srfi comparators rationale
@subsection Rationale


The four procedures above have complex dependencies on one another, and
it is inconvenient to have to pass them all to other procedures that
might or might not make use of all of them.  For example, a set
implementation naturally requires only an equality predicate, but if it
is implemented using a hash table, an appropriate hash function is also
required if the implementation does not provide one; alternatively, if
it is implemented using a tree, a comparison procedure is required.  By
passing a comparator rather than a bare equality predicate, the set
implementation can make use of whatever procedures are available and
useful to it.

This @srfi{} could not have been written without the work of Sebastian
Egner and Jens Axel Soegaard on @ansrfi{67}; much of the credit for this
@srfi{} is due to them, but none of the blame.  In addition, many of the
design decisions of this @srfi{} are copied from @ansrfi{67}'s design
rationale.

@c page
@node srfi comparators definitions
@subsection Definitions


A comparator is an object of a disjoint type.  It is a bundle of
procedures that are useful for comparing two objects either for equality
or for ordering.  There are four procedures in the bundle:

@table @strong
@item Type test predicate
It returns @true{} if its argument has the correct type to be passed as
an argument to the other three procedures, and @false{} otherwise.

@item Equality predicate
It returns @true{} if the two objects are the same in the sense of the
comparator, and @false{} otherwise.  It is the programmer's
responsibility to ensure that it is reflexive, symmetric, transitive,
and can handle any arguments that satisfy the type test predicate.

@item Comparison procedure
It returns @code{-1}, @code{0}, or @code{+1} if the first object
precedes the second, is equal to the second, or follows the second,
respectively, in a total order defined by the comparator.  It is the
programmer's responsibility to ensure that it is reflexive, weakly
antisymmetric, transitive, can handle any arguments that satisfy the
type test predicate, and returns @code{0} if and only if the equality
predicate returns @true{}.  Comparison procedures are compatible with
the @emph{compare procedures} of @ansrfi{67}; see @ansrfi{67} for the
rationale for adopting this return convention.

@item Hash function
It takes one argument, and returns an exact non--negative integer.  It
is the programmer's responsibility to ensure that it can handle any
argument that satisfies the type test predicate, and that it returns the
same value on two objects if the equality predicate says they are the
same (but not necessarily the converse).
@end table

It is also the programmer's responsibility to ensure that all four
procedures provide the same result whenever they are applied to the same
object(s) (in the sense of @func{eqv?}), unless the object(s) have been
mutated since the last invocation.  In particular, they must not depend
in any way on memory addresses in implementations where the garbage
collector can move objects in memory.

@c page
@node srfi comparators limitations
@subsection Limitations


The comparator objects defined in this @srfi{} are not applicable to
circular structures or to NaNs or objects containing them.  Attempts to
pass any such objects to any procedure defined here, or to any procedure
that is part of a comparator defined here, is an error except as
otherwise noted.

@c page
@node srfi comparators predicates
@subsection Predicates


@defun comparator? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a comparator; return @false{} otherwise.
@end defun


@defun comparator-comparison-procedure? @var{comparator}
Return @true{} if @var{comparator} has a supplied comparison procedure;
return @false{} otherwise.
@end defun


@defun comparator-hash-function? @var{comparator}
Return @true{} if @var{comparator} has a supplied hash function; return
@false{} otherwise.
@end defun

@c page
@node srfi comparators standard
@subsection Standard comparators


The following comparators are analogous to the standard compare
procedures of @ansrfi{67}.  They all provide appropriate hash functions
as well.


@defvr Constant boolean-comparator
Compare booleans using the total order @code{#f < #t}.

@lisp
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(define C boolean-comparator)

(comparator-test-type C #f)     @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C #t)     @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C 123)    @result{} #f

(comparator-check-type C #f)    @result{} #t
(comparator-check-type C #t)    @result{} #t
(try
    (comparator-check-type C (void))
  (catch E
    ((&comparator-type-error)   #t)
    (else                       #f)))
@result{} #t

(comparator-equal? C #f #f)     @result{} #t
(comparator-equal? C #f #t)     @result{} #f

(comparator-compare C #f #f)    @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C #f #t)    @result{} -1
(comparator-compare C #t #f)    @result{} +1
@end lisp
@end defvr

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------

@defvr Constant char-comparator
Compare characters using the total order implied by @func{char<?}.  On
@rnrs{6} and @rnrs{7} systems, this is Unicode code point order.

@lisp
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(define C char-comparator)

(comparator-test-type C #\a)    @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C #\b)    @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C 123)    @result{} #f

(comparator-check-type C #\a)   @result{} #t
(comparator-check-type C #\b)   @result{} #t
(try
    (comparator-check-type C (void))
  (catch E
    ((&comparator-type-error)   #t)
    (else                       #f)))
@result{} #t

(comparator-equal? C #\a #\a)   @result{} #t
(comparator-equal? C #\a #\b)   @result{} #f

(comparator-compare C #\a #\a)  @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C #\a #\b)  @result{} -1
(comparator-compare C #\b #\a)  @result{} +1

(comparator-hash C #\a)         @result{} 97
(comparator-hash C #\b)         @result{} 98
@end lisp
@end defvr

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------

@defvr Constant char-ci-comparator
Compare characters using the total order implied by @func{char-ci<?}.
On @rnrs{6} and @rnrs{7} systems, this is Unicode code point order after
the characters have been folded to lower case.

@lisp
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(define C char-ci-comparator)

(comparator-test-type C #\A)    @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C #\b)    @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C 123)    @result{} #f

(comparator-check-type C #\A)   @result{} #t
(comparator-check-type C #\b)   @result{} #t
(try
    (comparator-check-type C (void))
  (catch E
    ((&comparator-type-error)   #t)
    (else                       #f)))
@result{} #t

(comparator-equal? C #\A #\A)   @result{} #t
(comparator-equal? C #\A #\b)   @result{} #f

(comparator-compare C #\A #\A)  @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C #\A #\b)  @result{} -1
(comparator-compare C #\b #\A)  @result{} +1

(comparator-hash C #\A)         @result{} 97
(comparator-hash C #\b)         @result{} 98
@end lisp
@end defvr

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------

@defvr Constant string-comparator
Compare strings using the total order implied by @func{string<?}.  Note
that this order is implementation--dependent.

@lisp
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(define C string-comparator)

(comparator-test-type C "a")    @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C "b")    @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C 123)    @result{} #f

(comparator-check-type C "a")   @result{} #t
(comparator-check-type C "b")   @result{} #t
(try
    (comparator-check-type C (void))
  (catch E
    ((&comparator-type-error)   #t)
    (else                       #f)))
@result{} #t

(comparator-equal? C "a" "a")   @result{} #t
(comparator-equal? C "a" "b")   @result{} #f

(comparator-compare C "a" "a")  @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C "a" "b")  @result{} -1
(comparator-compare C "b" "a")  @result{} +1

(comparator-hash C "a")         @result{} 1798195
(comparator-hash C "b")         @result{} 36222037
@end lisp
@end defvr

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------

@defvr Constant string-ci-comparator
Compare strings using the total order implied by @func{string-ci<?}.
Note that this order is implementation--dependent.

@lisp
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(define C string-ci-comparator)

(comparator-test-type C "A")    @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C "b")    @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C 123)    @result{} #f

(comparator-check-type C "A")   @result{} #t
(comparator-check-type C "b")   @result{} #t
(try
    (comparator-check-type C (void))
  (catch E
    ((&comparator-type-error)   #t)
    (else                       #f)))
@result{} #t

(comparator-equal? C "A" "A")   @result{} #t
(comparator-equal? C "A" "b")   @result{} #f

(comparator-compare C "A" "A")  @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C "A" "b")  @result{} -1
(comparator-compare C "b" "A")  @result{} +1

(comparator-hash C "A")         @result{} 1798195
(comparator-hash C "b")         @result{} 36222037
@end lisp
@end defvr

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------

@defvr Constant symbol-comparator
Compare symbols using the total order implied by applying
@func{symbol->string} to the symbols and comparing them using the total
order implied by @func{string<?}.  It is not a requirement that the hash
function of @func{symbol-comparator} be consistent with the hash
function of @func{string-comparator}.

@lisp
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(define C string-comparator)

(comparator-test-type C 'a)     @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C 'b)     @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C 123)    @result{} #f

(comparator-check-type C 'a)    @result{} #t
(comparator-check-type C 'b)    @result{} #t
(try
    (comparator-check-type C (void))
  (catch E
    ((&comparator-type-error)   #t)
    (else                       #f)))
@result{} #t

(comparator-equal? C 'a 'a)     @result{} #t
(comparator-equal? C 'a 'b)     @result{} #f

(comparator-compare C 'a 'a)    @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C 'a 'b)    @result{} -1
(comparator-compare C 'b 'a)    @result{} +1

(comparator-hash C 'a)          @result{} 1798195
(comparator-hash C 'b)          @result{} 36222037
@end lisp
@end defvr

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------

@defvr Constant fixnum-comparator
@defvrx Constant exact-integer-comparator
@defvrx Constant integer-comparator
@defvrx Constant rational-comparator
@defvrx Constant real-comparator
@defvrx Constant complex-comparator
@defvrx Constant number-comparator
These comparators compare fixnums, exact integers, integers, rational
numbers, real numbers, complex numbers, and any numbers using the total
order implied by @func{<}.

They must be compatible with the @rnrs{5} numerical tower in the
following sense: if @code{S} is a subtype of the numerical type @code{T}
and the two objects are members of @code{S}, then the equality predicate
and comparison procedures (but not necessarily the hash function) of
@code{S-comparator} and @code{T-comparator} compute the same results on
those objects.

Since non--real numbers cannot be compared with @func{<}, the following
least--surprising ordering is defined: if the real parts are @func{<} or
@func{>}, so are the numbers; otherwise, the numbers are ordered by
their imaginary parts.  This can still produce surprising results if one
real part is exact and the other is inexact.

@code{fixnum-comparator} is a @value{PRJNAME} extension.

@lisp
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(define C exact-integer-comparator)

(comparator-test-type C 1)      @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C 2)      @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C 123)    @result{} #f

(comparator-check-type C 1)     @result{} #t
(comparator-check-type C 2)     @result{} #t
(try
    (comparator-check-type C (void))
  (catch E
    ((&comparator-type-error)   #t)
    (else                       #f)))
@result{} #t

(comparator-equal? C 1 1)       @result{} #t
(comparator-equal? C 1 2)       @result{} #f

(comparator-compare C 1 1)      @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C 1 2)      @result{} -1
(comparator-compare C 2 1)      @result{} +1

(comparator-hash C 1)           @result{} 1
(comparator-hash C 2)           @result{} 2
@end lisp
@end defvr

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------

@defvr Constant pair-comparator
Compare pairs using @func{default-comparator}  on their cars.
If the cars are not equal, that value is returned.  If they are equal,
@func{default-comparator} is used on their cdrs and that value is
returned.

@lisp
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(define C pair-comparator)

(comparator-test-type C '(1 . 2))       @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C '(3 . 4))       @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C 123)            @result{} #f

(comparator-check-type C '(1 . 2))      @result{} #t
(comparator-check-type C '(3 . 4))      @result{} #t
(try
    (comparator-check-type C (void))
  (catch E
    ((&comparator-type-error)   #t)
    (else                       #f)))
@result{} #t

(comparator-equal? C '(1 . 2) '(1 . 2)) @result{} #t
(comparator-equal? C '(1 . 2) '(3 . 4)) @result{} #f

(comparator-compare C '(1 . 2) '(1 . 2)) @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C '(1 . 2) '(3 . 4)) @result{} -1
(comparator-compare C '(3 . 4) '(1 . 2)) @result{} +1

(comparator-hash C '(1 . 2))            @result{} 3
(comparator-hash C '(3 . 4))            @result{} 7
@end lisp
@end defvr

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------

@defvr Constant list-comparator
Compare lists lexicographically, as follows:

@itemize
@item
The empty list compares equal to itself.

@item
The empty list compares less than any non--empty list.

@item
Two non--empty lists are compared by comparing their cars.  If the cars
are not equal when compared using @func{default-comparator} ,
then the result is the result of that comparison.  Otherwise, the cdrs
are compared using @func{list-comparator}.
@end itemize

@lisp
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(define C list-comparator)

(comparator-test-type C '(1 2))         @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C '(3 4))         @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C 123)            @result{} #f

(comparator-check-type C '(1 2))        @result{} #t
(comparator-check-type C '(3 4))        @result{} #t
(try
    (comparator-check-type C (void))
  (catch E
    ((&comparator-type-error)   #t)
    (else                       #f)))
@result{} #t

(comparator-equal? C '(1 2) '(1 2))     @result{} #t
(comparator-equal? C '(1 2) '(3 4))     @result{} #f

(comparator-compare C '(1 2) '(1 2))    @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C '(1 2) '(3 4))    @result{} -1
(comparator-compare C '(3 4) '(1 2))    @result{} +1

(comparator-hash C '(1 2))              @result{} 617064
(comparator-hash C '(3 4))              @result{} 617132
@end lisp
@end defvr

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------

@defvr Constant vector-comparator
@defvrx Constant bytevector-comparator
Compare vectors and bytevectors by comparing their lengths.  A shorter
argument is always less than a longer one.  If the lengths are equal,
then each element is compared in turn using @func{default-comparator}
until a pair of unequal elements is found, in which case the result is
the result of that comparison.  If all elements are equal, the arguments
are equal.

@quotation
@strong{NOTE} @value{PRJNAME} supports bytevectors, other Scheme
implementations might not support them.  If the implementation does not
support bytevectors, @func{bytevector-comparator} has a type testing
procedure that always returns @false{}.
@end quotation

@lisp
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(define C vector-comparator)

(comparator-test-type C '#(1 2))        @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C '#(3 4))        @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C 123)            @result{} #f

(comparator-check-type C '#(1 2))       @result{} #t
(comparator-check-type C '#(3 4))       @result{} #t
(try
    (comparator-check-type C (void))
  (catch E
    ((&comparator-type-error)   #t)
    (else                       #f)))
@result{} #t

(comparator-equal? C '#(1 2) '#(1 2))   @result{} #t
(comparator-equal? C '#(1 2) '#(3 4))   @result{} #f

(comparator-compare C '#(1 2) '#(1 2))  @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C '#(1 2) '#(3 4))  @result{} -1
(comparator-compare C '#(3 4) '#(1 2))  @result{} +1

(comparator-hash C '#(1 2))             @result{} 177575
(comparator-hash C '#(3 4))             @result{} 177577
@end lisp
@end defvr

@c page
@node srfi comparators default
@subsection The default comparator


@defun default-comparator
This is a comparator that accepts any two Scheme values (with the
exceptions listed in the ``Limitations'' section, @ref{srfi comparators
limitations}) and orders them in some implementation--defined way,
subject to the following conditions:

@itemize
@item
The following ordering between types must hold:

@enumerate
@item
the empty list precedes pairs, with proper lists preceding improper
lists,

@item
which precede booleans,

@item
which precede characters,

@item
which precede strings,

@item
which precede symbols,

@item
which precede numbers,

@item
which precede vectors,

@item
which precede bytevectors,

@item
which precede the @code{(void)} object (this is a @value{PRJNAME}
extension),

@item
which precede the @code{(eof-object)} object (this is a @value{PRJNAME}
extension),

@item
which precede the @code{(would-block-object)} object (this is a
@value{PRJNAME} extension),

@item
which precede the @value{PRJNAME} struct objects and @rnrs{6} record
objects (this is a @value{PRJNAME} extension),

@item
which precede all other objects.
@end enumerate

@noindent
this ordering is compatible with @ansrfi{67}.

@item
When applied to pairs, booleans, characters, strings, symbols, numbers,
vectors, or bytevectors, its behaviour must be the same as
@func{pair-comparator}, @func{boolean-comparator},
@func{character-comparator}, @func{string-comparator},
@func{symbol-comparator}, @func{number-comparator},
@func{vector-comparator}, and @func{bytevector-comparator} respectively.
The same should be true when applied to an object or objects of a type
for which a standard comparator is defined elsewhere.

@item
Given disjoint types @code{A} and @code{B}, one of three conditions must
hold:

@itemize -
@item
All objects of type @code{A} compare less than all objects of type
@code{B}.

@item
All objects of type @code{A} compare greater than all objects of type
@code{B}.

@item
All objects of either type @code{A} or type @code{B} compare equal to
each other.  This is not permitted for any of the standard types
mentioned above.
@end itemize
@end itemize
@end defun


@defun comparator-register-default! @var{comparator}
Register a new @var{comparator} for use by the default comparator.

Extent the default comparator to understand objects that satisfy the
type test of the registered @var{comparator}, and to apply it when
comparing two objects that satisfy that type test.  Such objects are
said to belong to the ``registered types'', whereas all the objects
other than the ones supported by default belong to the ``unregistered
types''.  When dealing with objects of unregistered types, the default
comparator makes them compare equal and hash to @code{0}, a safe but
fairly useless default.

The effect of comparing two objects of different registered types is
only partly predictable, as it depends on the order in which
@func{comparator-register-default!} is called.  However, the normal
guarantees of the default comparator still apply.  In addition, every
object of a registered type compares less than all objects of
unregistered types.
@end defun


Here is an example of registering comparators for @value{PRJNAME}
structs and @rnrs{6} records (notice that @func{struct-hash} and
@func{record-hash} are very poor hash functions):

@lisp
(import (vicare)
  (srfi :114))

(define C default-comparator)

(define-struct a-struct
  (a b c))

(define-record-type a-record
  (fields a b c))

(define (a-struct-comparison a b)
  (cond ((struct=? a b)
         0)
        ((< (a-struct-a a)
            (a-struct-a b))
         -1)
        (else +1)))

(define (a-record-comparison a b)
  (cond ((record=? a b)
         0)
        ((< (a-record-a a)
            (a-record-a b))
         -1)
        (else +1)))

(define a-struct-comparator
  (make-comparator a-struct?
                   struct=?
                   a-struct-comparison
                   struct-hash))

(define a-record-comparator
  (make-comparator a-record?
                   record=?
                   a-record-comparison
                   record-hash))

(comparator-register-default! a-struct-comparator)
(comparator-register-default! a-record-comparator)

;;; type test

(comparator-test-type C (make-a-struct 1 2 3))  @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C (make-a-record 1 2 3))  @result{} #t

;;; type check

(comparator-check-type C (make-a-struct 1 2 3)) @result{} #t
(comparator-check-type C (make-a-record 1 2 3)) @result{} #t

;;; equality

(let ((P (make-a-struct 1 2 3))
      (Q (make-a-struct 1 2 3))
      (R (make-a-struct 1 2 9)))
  (comparator-equal? C P P)     @result{} #t
  (comparator-equal? C P Q)     @result{} #t
  (comparator-equal? C P R))    @result{} #f

(let ((P (make-a-record 1 2 3))
      (Q (make-a-record 1 2 3))
      (R (make-a-record 1 2 9)))
  (comparator-equal? C P P)     @result{} #t
  (comparator-equal? C P Q)     @result{} #t
  (comparator-equal? C P R))    @result{} #f

;;; comparison

(let ((P (make-a-struct +1 2 3))
      (Q (make-a-struct -1 2 3))
      (R (make-a-struct +2 2 9)))
  (comparator-compare C P P)   @result{} 0
  (comparator-compare C P Q)   @result{} +1
  (comparator-compare C P R))  @result{} -1

(let ((P (make-a-record +1 2 3))
      (Q (make-a-record -1 2 3))
      (R (make-a-record +2 2 9)))
  (comparator-compare C P P)   @result{} 0
  (comparator-compare C P Q)   @result{} +1
  (comparator-compare C P R))  @result{} -1

;;; hash function

(comparator-hash C (make-a-struct 1 2 3))
@result{} 1

(comparator-hash C (make-a-record 1 2 3))
@result{} 1
@end lisp

@c page
@node srfi comparators constructors
@subsection Comparator constructors


Most of the following comparator constructors are close analogues of the
standard compare procedures of @ansrfi{67}.  They all provide
appropriate hash functions as well.  Note that comparator constructors
are allowed to cache their results: they need not return a newly
allocated object, since comparators are purely functional.

@menu
* srfi comparators constructors general::  General comparators.
* srfi comparators constructors real::     Inexact real comparators.
* srfi comparators constructors pair::     Pair comparators.
* srfi comparators constructors list::     List comparators.
* srfi comparators constructors vector::   Vector comparators.
* srfi comparators constructors bytevec::  Bytevector comparators.
* srfi comparators constructors select::   Selecting comparators.
* srfi comparators constructors refine::   Refining comparators.
* srfi comparators constructors reverse::  Reverse comparators.
* srfi comparators constructors debug::    Debug comparators.
@end menu

@c page
@node srfi comparators constructors general
@subsubsection General comparators


@defun make-comparator @var{type-test} @var{equality} @var{compare} @var{hash}
Return a comparator which bundles the @var{type-test}, @var{equality},
@var{compare}, and @var{hash} procedures provided.  As a convenience,
the following additional values are accepted:

@itemize
@item
If @var{type-test} is @true{}: a @var{type-test} procedure that accepts
any arguments is provided.

@item
If @var{equality} is @true{}: an @var{equality} predicate is provided
that returns @true{} if and only if @var{compare} returns @code{0}.

@item
If @var{compare} or @var{hash} is @false{}, a procedure is provided that
signals an error on application.  The predicates
@func{comparator-comparison-procedure?} and/or
@func{comparator-hash-function?}, respectively, will return @false{} in
these cases.
@end itemize
@end defun

@c page
@node srfi comparators constructors real
@subsubsection Inexact real comparators


@defun make-inexact-real-comparator @var{epsilon} @var{rounding} @var{nan-handling}
Return a comparator that compares inexact real numbers including NaNs as
follows: if after rounding to the nearest @var{epsilon} they are the
same, they compare equal; otherwise they compare as specified by
@func{<}.

The direction of rounding is specified by the @var{rounding} argument,
which is either a procedure accepting two arguments (the number and
@var{epsilon}), or else one of the symbols @code{floor}, @code{ceiling},
@code{truncate}, or @code{round}.

The value of @var{epsilon} is used by the generated comparator only if
@var{rounding} is a procedure: it is ignored if @var{rounding} is a
symbol.  When @var{epsilon} is not @false{} and @var{rounding} is a
symbol: this function raises a @strong{continuable} exception with
compound condition object of types:
@condition{inexact-real-comparator-with-unused-epsilon},
@condition{who}, @condition{message}, @condition{irritants}.

The argument @var{nan-handling} specifies how to compare NaN arguments
to non--NaN arguments.

@itemize
@item
If it is a procedure: the procedure is invoked on the other argument if
either argument is a NaN.

@item
If it is the symbol @code{min}: NaN values precede all other values.

@item
If it is the symbol @code{max}: NaN values follow all other values.

@item
If it is the symbol @code{error}: an error is signalled if a NaN value
is compared by raising a non--continuable exception with compound
condition object of types: @condition{who}, @condition{message},
@condition{irritants}, @condition{comparator-nan-comparison-error}.

@item
If both arguments are NaNs: they always compare as equal.
@end itemize
@end defun


Here is an example of comparator using the @code{round} rounding mode
and the @code{error} policy to compare @code{+nan.0}:

@lisp
#!vicare
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(define-constant C
  (make-inexact-real-comparator #f 'round 'error))

;; type test
(comparator-test-type C 1.2)    @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C "ciao") @result{} #f
(comparator-test-type C 1+2i)   @result{} #f

;; type check
(comparator-check-type C 1.2)   @result{} #t
(try
    (comparator-check-type C (void))
  (catch E
    ((&comparator-type-error)
     #t)
    (else #f)))
@result{} #t

;; comparison
(comparator-compare C 1.2 1.2)          @result{}  0
(comparator-compare C 1.0 2.0)          @result{} -1
(comparator-compare C 2.0 1.0)          @result{} +1

(comparator-compare C +inf.0 +inf.0)    @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C -inf.0 -inf.0)    @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C -inf.0 +inf.0)    @result{} -1
(comparator-compare C +inf.0 -inf.0)    @result{} +1

(comparator-compare C +nan.0 +nan.0)    @result{} 0
(try
    (comparator-compare C +nan.0 1.0)
  (catch E
    ((&comparator-nan-comparison-error)
     #t)
    (else E)))
@result{} #t
(try
    (comparator-compare C 1.0 +nan.0)
  (catch E
    ((&comparator-nan-comparison-error)
     #t)
    (else E)))
@result{} #t

;; comparison with rounding
(comparator-compare C 1.04 1.0) @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C 0.96 1.0) @result{} 0

;; hash
(= (comparator-hash C 1.0) (comparator-hash C 1.04))      @result{} #t
(= (comparator-hash C 1.0) (comparator-hash C 0.96))      @result{} #t
(non-negative-exact-integer? (comparator-hash C +inf.0))  @result{} #t
(non-negative-exact-integer? (comparator-hash C -inf.0))  @result{} #t
(non-negative-exact-integer? (comparator-hash C +nan.0))  @result{} #t
@end lisp

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here is an example of comparator that rounds to the nearest @math{0.1}
and uses the @code{min} policy to compare @code{+nan.0}:

@lisp
#!vicare
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(define* (round-to-epsilon @{R flonum?@} @{epsilon flonum?@})
  (infix round(R / epsilon) * epsilon))

(define-constant C
  (make-inexact-real-comparator 0.1 round-to-epsilon 'min))

;; rounding to
(round-to-epsilon 1.0   0.1)    @result{} 1.0
(round-to-epsilon 1.05  0.1)    @result{} 1.0
(round-to-epsilon 0.951 0.1)    @result{} 1.0
(round-to-epsilon 0.949 0.1)    @result{} 0.9

;; type test
(comparator-test-type C 1.2)    @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C +inf.0) @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C -inf.0) @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C -nan.0) @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C "ciao") @result{} #f
(comparator-test-type C 1+2i)   @result{} #f

;; type check
(comparator-check-type C 1.2)   @result{} #t
(try
    (comparator-check-type C (void))
  (catch E
    ((&comparator-type-error)
     #t)
    (else E)))
@result{} #t

;; comparison
(comparator-compare C 1.2 1.2)          @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C 1.0 2.0)          @result{} -1
(comparator-compare C 2.0 1.0)          @result{} +1

(comparator-compare C +inf.0 +inf.0)    @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C -inf.0 -inf.0)    @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C -inf.0 +inf.0)    @result{} -1
(comparator-compare C +inf.0 -inf.0)    @result{} +1

(comparator-compare C +nan.0 +nan.0)    @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C +nan.0 1.0)       @result{} -1
(comparator-compare C 1.0 +nan.0)       @result{} +1

;; comparison with rounding
(comparator-compare C 1.04  1.0)        @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C 0.96  1.0)        @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C 0.951 1.0)        @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C 0.949 1.0)        @result{} -1
(comparator-compare C 0.949 0.9)        @result{} 0

;; hash
(= (comparator-hash C 1.0)  (comparator-hash C 1.04))     @result{} #t
(= (comparator-hash C 1.0)  (comparator-hash C 0.96))     @result{} #t
(= (comparator-hash C 1.0)  (comparator-hash C 0.951))    @result{} #t
(= (comparator-hash C 1.04) (comparator-hash C 0.951))    @result{} #t
(non-negative-exact-integer? (comparator-hash C +inf.0))  @result{} #t
(non-negative-exact-integer? (comparator-hash C -inf.0))  @result{} #t
(non-negative-exact-integer? (comparator-hash C +nan.0))  @result{} #t
@end lisp

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here is an example of comparator using the @code{max} policy to compare
@code{+nan.0}:

@lisp
#!vicare
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(define-constant C
  (make-inexact-real-comparator #f 'round 'max))

(comparator-compare C +nan.0 +nan.0)    @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C +nan.0 1.0)       @result{} +1
(comparator-compare C 1.0 +nan.0)       @result{} -1
@end lisp

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here is an example of comparator using a procedure as policy to compare
@code{+nan.0}:

@lisp
#!vicare
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(define (nan-comparison other-R)
  ;;NaN is equal to any number.
  ;;
  0)

(define-constant C
  (make-inexact-real-comparator #f 'round nan-comparison))

(comparator-compare C +nan.0 +nan.0)    @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C +nan.0 +1.0)      @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C +1.0   +nan.0)    @result{} 0
@end lisp

@c page
@node srfi comparators constructors pair
@subsubsection Pair comparators


@defun make-pair-comparator @var{car-comparator} @var{cdr-comparator}
Return a comparator that compares pairs first on their cars using
@var{car-comparator}.  If the cars are equal: it compares the cdrs using
@var{cdr-comparator}.  The hash function makes use of both the car and
the cdr.

@lisp
#!vicare
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(define-constant C
  (make-pair-comparator exact-integer-comparator
                        real-comparator))

;; type test
(comparator-test-type C '(1 . 2.0))     @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C '(1 . 2.0))     @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C '())            @result{} #f
(comparator-test-type C '(1 . 2+1i))    @result{} #f
(comparator-test-type C "ciao")         @result{} #f

;; type check
(comparator-check-type C '(1 . 2.0))    @result{} #t
(try
    (comparator-check-type C (void))
  (catch E
    ((&comparator-type-error)
     #t)
    (else E)))
@result{} #t

;; comparison
(comparator-compare C '(1 . 2.0) '(1 . 2.0))   @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C '(1 . 2.0) '(1 . 3))     @result{} -1
(comparator-compare C '(1 . 3)   '(1 . 2.0))   @result{} +1

;; hash
(non-negative-exact-integer?
   (comparator-hash C '(1 . 2.0)))      @result{} #t
@end lisp
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------

@defun make-car-comparator @var{comparator}
Return a comparator that compares pairs on their cars alone using
@var{comparator}.  The hash function makes use of the car only.

@lisp
#!vicare
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(define-constant C
  (make-car-comparator exact-integer-comparator))

;; type test
(comparator-test-type C '(1 . 2.0))     @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C '(1 . 2.0))     @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C '(1 . 2+1i))    @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C '(2.0 . 1))     @result{} #f
(comparator-test-type C '())            @result{} #f
(comparator-test-type C "ciao")         @result{} #f

;; type check
(comparator-check-type C '(1 . 2.0))    @result{} #t
(try
    (comparator-check-type C (void))
  (catch E
    ((&comparator-type-error)
     #t)
    (else E)))
@result{} #t

;; comparison
(comparator-compare C '(1 . 2) '(1 . 3))        @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C '(1 . 2) '(2 . 3))        @result{} -1
(comparator-compare C '(2 . 2) '(1 . 2))        @result{} +1

;; hash
(non-negative-exact-integer?
   (comparator-hash C '(1 . 2.0)))      @result{} #t
@end lisp
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------

@defun make-cdr-comparator @var{comparator}
Return a comparator that compares pairs on their cdrs alone using
@var{comparator}.  The hash function makes use of the cdr only.

@lisp
#!vicare
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(define-constant C
  (make-cdr-comparator exact-integer-comparator))

;; type test
(comparator-test-type C '(2.0 . 1))     @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C '(2.0 . 1))     @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C '(2+1i . 1))    @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C '(1 . 2.0))     @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C '())            @result{} #f
(comparator-test-type C "ciao")         @result{} #f

;; type check
(comparator-check-type C '(2.0 . 1))    @result{} #t
(try
    (comparator-check-type C (void))
  (catch E
    ((&comparator-type-error)
     #t)
    (else E)))
@result{} #t

;; comparison
(comparator-compare C '(2 . 1) '(3 . 1))        @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C '(2 . 1) '(3 . 2))        @result{} -1
(comparator-compare C '(2 . 2) '(2 . 1))        @result{} +1

;; hash
(non-negative-exact-integer?
   (comparator-hash C '(2.0 . 1)))      @result{} #t
@end lisp
@end defun

@c page
@node srfi comparators constructors list
@subsubsection List comparators


@defun make-list-comparator @var{element-comparator}
Build and return a comparator object behaving like
@func{list-comparator} but using @var{element-comparator} rather than
@func{default-comparator}.

@lisp
#!vicare
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(define-constant C
  (make-list-comparator exact-integer-comparator))

;; type test
(comparator-test-type C '())            @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C '(1 2))         @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C '(1 2 . 3))     @result{} #f
(comparator-test-type C '(1 2.0))       @result{} #f
(comparator-test-type C "ciao")         @result{} #f
(comparator-test-type C '(1+2i))        @result{} #f

;; type check
(comparator-check-type C '(1 2))        @result{} #t
(try
    (comparator-check-type C (void))
  (catch E
    ((&comparator-type-error)
     #t)
    (else E)))
@result{} #t

;; comparison
(comparator-compare C '(1 2) '(1 2))   @result{} 0)
(comparator-compare C '(1 2) '(1 3))   @result{} -1
(comparator-compare C '(1 3) '(1 2))   @result{} +1

(comparator-compare C '()    '())      @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C '()    '(1 2))   @result{} -1
(comparator-compare C '(1 2) '())      @result{} +1

;; hash
(non-negative-exact-integer?
  (comparator-hash C '()))    @result{} #t
(non-negative-exact-integer?
  (comparator-hash C '(1 2))) @result{} #t
@end lisp
@end defun


@defun make-listwise-comparator @var{type-test} @var{element-comparator} @var{empty?} @var{head} @var{tail}
Return a comparator which compares two objects that satisfy
@var{type-test} as if they were lists, using the @var{empty?} procedure
to determine if an object is empty, and the @var{head} and @var{tail}
procedures to access particular elements.
@end defun


@defun make-improper-list-comparator @var{element-comparator}
Return a comparator that compares arbitrary objects as follows: the
empty list precedes all pairs, which precede all other objects.  Pairs
are compared as if with:

@lisp
(make-pair-comparator @var{element-comparator} @var{element-comparator})
@end lisp

All other objects are compared using @var{element-comparator}.

Notice that @var{element-comparator} is used only to compare elements
and compute the hash value elements; it is @strong{not} used to validate
the type of elements.

@lisp
#!vicare
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(module (C)

  (define element-compare
    (let ((compare (comparator-comparison-procedure
                      exact-integer-comparator)))
      (lambda (A B)
        (if (pair? A)
            (begin
              (assert (pair? B))
              (let ((rv (compare (car A) (car B))))
                (if (zero? rv)
                    (comparator-compare C (cdr A) (cdr B))
                  rv)))
          (compare A B)))))

  (define-constant E
    (make-comparator #t #t
       element-compare
       (comparator-hash-function default-comparator)))

  (define-constant C
    (make-improper-list-comparator E))

  #| end of module |# )

;; type test
(comparator-test-type C '())            @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C '(1 2))         @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C '(1 2 . 3))     @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C '(1 2.0))       @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C "ciao")         @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C '(1+2i))        @result{} #t

;; type check
(comparator-check-type C '(1 2))        @result{} #t
(comparator-check-type C (void))        @result{} #t

;; comparison
(comparator-compare C '(1 2) '(1 2))    @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C '(1 2) '(1 3))    @result{} -1
(comparator-compare C '(1 3) '(1 2))    @result{} +1

(comparator-compare C '()    '())       @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C '()    '(1 2))    @result{} -1
(comparator-compare C '(1 2) '())       @result{} +1

(comparator-compare C '(1 2 . 3) '(1 2 . 3))    @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C '(1 2 . 3) '(1 2 . 4))    @result{} -1
(comparator-compare C '(1 2 . 4) '(1 2 . 3))    @result{} +1

(comparator-compare C '(1 2 9 . 3) '(1 2 9 . 3)) @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C '(1 2 9 . 3) '(1 2 9 . 4)) @result{} -1
(comparator-compare C '(1 2 9 . 4) '(1 2 9 . 3)) @result{} +1

;; hash
(non-negative-exact-integer? (comparator-hash C '()))        @result{} #t
(non-negative-exact-integer? (comparator-hash C '(1 2)))     @result{} #t
(non-negative-exact-integer? (comparator-hash C '(1 2 . 3))) @result{} #t
(non-negative-exact-integer? (comparator-hash C "ciao"))     @result{} #t
@end lisp
@end defun

@c page
@node srfi comparators constructors vector
@subsubsection Vector comparators


@defun make-vector-comparator @var{element-comparator}
Build and return a comparator object behaving like
@func{vector-comparator} but using @var{element-comparator} rather than
@func{default-comparator}.

@lisp
#!vicare
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(define-constant C
  (make-vector-comparator exact-integer-comparator))

;; type test
(comparator-test-type C '#())           @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C '#(1 2))        @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C '#(1 2.0))      @result{} #f
(comparator-test-type C "ciao")         @result{} #f
(comparator-test-type C '#(1+2i)        @result{} #f

;; type check
(comparator-check-type C '#(1 2))       @result{} #t
(try
    (comparator-check-type C (void))
  (catch E
    ((&comparator-type-error)
     #t)
    (else E)))
@result{} #t

;; comparison
(comparator-compare C '#(1 2) '#(1 2))  @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C '#(1 2) '#(1 3))  @result{} -1
(comparator-compare C '#(1 3) '#(1 2))  @result{} +1

(comparator-compare C '#()    '#())     @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C '#()    '#(1 2))  @result{} -1
(comparator-compare C '#(1 2) '#())     @result{} +1

;; hash
(non-negative-exact-integer?
  (comparator-hash C '#())))    @result{} #t
(non-negative-exact-integer?
  (comparator-hash C '#(1 2)))  @result{} #t
@end lisp
@end defun


@defun make-vectorwise-comparator @var{type-test} @var{element-comparator} @var{length} @var{ref}
Return a comparator which compares two objects that satisfy
@var{type-test} as if they were vectors, using the @var{length}
procedure to determine the length of the object, and the @var{ref}
procedure to access a particular element.
@end defun

@c page
@node srfi comparators constructors bytevec
@subsubsection Bytevector comparators


@defun make-bytevector-comparator @var{element-comparator}
Build and return a comparator object behaving like
@func{bytevector-comparator} but using @var{element-comparator} rather
than @func{default-comparator}.

@lisp
#!vicare
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(define-constant E
  (make-comparator (lambda (element)
                     (or (= 1 element)
                         (zero? element)))
                   fx=?
                   (lambda (a b)
                     (cond ((fx=? a b)   0)
                           ((fx<? a b)  -1)
                           (else        +1)))
                   fixnum-hash))

(define-constant C
  (make-bytevector-comparator E))

;; type test
(comparator-test-type C '#vu8())        @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C '#vu8(1 0))     @result{} #t
(comparator-test-type C '#vu8(1 2))     @result{} #f
(comparator-test-type C "ciao")         @result{} #f

;; type check
(comparator-check-type C '#vu8(1 0))    @result{} #t
(try
    (comparator-check-type C (void))
  (catch E
    ((&comparator-type-error)
     #t)
    (else E)))
@result{} #t

;; comparison
(comparator-compare C '#vu8(1 0) '#vu8(1 0))   @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C '#vu8(1 0) '#vu8(1 1))   @result{} -1
(comparator-compare C '#vu8(1 1) '#vu8(1 0))   @result{} +1

(comparator-compare C '#vu8()    '#vu8())      @result{} 0
(comparator-compare C '#vu8()    '#vu8(1 0))   @result{} -1
(comparator-compare C '#vu8(1 0) '#vu8())      @result{} +1

;; hash
(non-negative-exact-integer?
  (comparator-hash C '#vu8()))    @result{} #t
(non-negative-exact-integer?
  (comparator-hash C '#vu8(1 0))) @result{} #t
@end lisp
@end defun

@c page
@node srfi comparators constructors select
@subsubsection Selecting comparators


@defun make-selecting-comparator @varo{comparator} @var{comparator} @dots{}
Return a comparator whose procedures make use of the @var{comparator}
arguments as follows:

@itemize
@item
The type test predicate passes its argument to the type test predicates
of the @var{comparator}s in the sequence given.  If any of them returns
@true{}: so does the type test predicate; otherwise, it returns
@false{}.

@item
The arguments of the equality, compare, and hash functions are passed to
the type test predicate of each comparator in sequence.  The first
comparator whose type test predicate is satisfied on all the arguments
is used when comparing those arguments.  All other comparators are
ignored.  If no type test predicate is satisfied, an error is signalled.
@end itemize

This procedure is analogous to the expression types
@func{select-compare} and @func{cond-compare} from @ansrfi{67}.

@lisp
#!vicare
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(define-constant C
  (make-selecting-comparator boolean-comparator
                             exact-integer-comparator
                             string-comparator))

;; type test
(let ((test-type (comparator-type-test-procedure C)))
  (test-type #t)        @result{} #t
  (test-type #f)        @result{} #t
  (test-type 1)         @result{} #t
  (test-type "ciao")    @result{} #t
  (test-type '(1 . 2))  @result{} #f
  (test-type 2.0)       @result{} #f
  (test-type 1+2i))     @result{} #f

;; type check
(let ((check-type (comparator-check-type-procedure C)))
  (check-type #t)       @result{} #t
  (check-type #f)       @result{} #t
  (check-type 1)        @result{} #t
  (check-type "ciao")   @result{} #t
  (try
      (comparator-check-type C (void))
    (catch E
      ((&comparator-type-error)
       #t)
      (else E))))       @result{} #t

;; comparison
(let ((compare (comparator-comparison-procedure C)))
  (compare #t #t)       @result{} 0
  (compare #t #f)       @result{} +1
  (compare #f #t)       @result{} -1

  (compare 1 1)         @result{} 0
  (compare 2 1)         @result{} +1
  (compare 1 2)         @result{} -1

  (compare "1" "1")     @result{} 0
  (compare "2" "1")     @result{} +1
  (compare "1" "2")     @result{} -1

  (try
      (compare #t 1)
    (catch E
      ((&comparator-type-error)
       #t)
      (else E)))        @result{} #t

  (try
      (compare #t "ciao")
    (catch E
      ((&comparator-type-error)
       #t)
      (else E)))        @result{} #t

  (try
      (compare 1 "ciao")
    (catch E
      ((&comparator-type-error)
       #t)
      (else E))))       @result{} #t

;; hash
(let ((hash (comparator-hash-function C)))
  (non-negative-exact-integer? (hash #t))       @result{} #t
  (non-negative-exact-integer? (hash #f))       @result{} #t
  (non-negative-exact-integer? (hash 1))        @result{} #t
  (non-negative-exact-integer? (hash "ciao"))   @result{} #t

  (try
      (hash 1+2i)
    (catch E
      ((&comparator-type-error)
       #t)
      (else E))))       @result{} #t
@end lisp
@end defun

@c page
@node srfi comparators constructors refine
@subsubsection Refining comparators


@defun make-refining-comparator @varo{comparator} @var{comparator} @dots{}
Return a comparator that makes use of the @var{comparator}s in the same
way as @func{make-selecting-comparator}, except that its procedures can
look past the first comparator whose type test predicate is satisfied.

If the comparison procedure of the first comparator returns zero: the
next comparator whose type test predicate is satisfied is tried, then
the next and so on, until one returns a non--zero value.  If there are
no more such comparators, then the comparison procedure returns zero.

The equality predicate is defined in the same way.  If no type test
predicate is satisfied, an error is signalled.

The hash function of the result returns a value computed using the last
comparator in the given list for which the type test procedure returns
true.

@quotation
According to the @srfi{}: the hash function of the result returns a
value which depends, in an implementation--defined way, on the results
of invoking the hash functions of the comparators whose type test
predicates are satisfied on its argument.  In particular, it may depend
solely on the first or last such hash function.  If no type test
predicate is satisfied, an error is signalled.
@end quotation

This procedure is analogous to the expression type @func{refine-compare}
from @ansrfi{67}.

@lisp
#!vicare
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(define* (round-to-epsilon @{R flonum?@} @{epsilon flonum?@})
  (infix round(R / epsilon) * epsilon))

(define-constant C
  (make-refining-comparator
   (make-inexact-real-comparator 0.1   round-to-epsilon 'error)
   (make-inexact-real-comparator 0.01  round-to-epsilon 'error)
   (make-inexact-real-comparator 0.001 round-to-epsilon 'error)))

;; type test
(let ((test-type (comparator-type-test-procedure C)))
  (test-type 1.1)       @result{} #t
  (test-type 1)         @result{} #f
  (test-type "ciao"))   @result{} #f

;; type check
(let ((check-type (comparator-check-type-procedure C)))
  (check-type 1.1)      @result{} #t
  (try
      (comparator-check-type C 1)
    (catch E
      ((&comparator-type-error)
       #t)
      (else E))))       @result{} #t

;; comparison
(let ((compare (comparator-comparison-procedure C)))
  (compare 1. 1.)       @result{} 0
  (compare 2. 1.)       @result{} +1
  (compare 1. 2.)       @result{} -1

  ;;Equal according to the first comparator,
  ;;different according to the second.
  (compare 1.00 1.05)   @result{} -1
  (compare 1.05 1.00)   @result{} +1

  ;;Equal according to the first and second
  ;;comparators, different according to the
  ;;third.
  (compare 1.0   1.005) @result{} -1
  (compare 1.005 1.0)   @result{} +1

  ;;Equal according to the first, second and
  ;;third comparators.
  (compare 1.0 1.0005)  @result{} 0
  (compare 1.0005 1.0)  @result{} 0

  (try
      (compare 1 "ciao")
    (catch E
      ((&comparator-type-error)
       #t)
      (else E))))       @result{} #t

;; hash
(let ((hash (comparator-hash-function C)))
  (non-negative-exact-integer? (hash 1.2))      @result{} #t

  (try
      (hash 1+2i)
    (catch E
      ((&comparator-type-error)
       #t)
      (else E))))       @result{} #t
@end lisp
@end defun

@c page
@node srfi comparators constructors reverse
@subsubsection Reverse comparators


@defun make-reverse-comparator @var{comparator}
Return a comparator that behaves like @var{comparator}, except that the
compare procedure returns @code{+1}, @code{0}, and @code{-1} instead of
@code{-1}, @code{0}, and @code{+1} respectively.  This allows ordering
in reverse.
@end defun


Here a usage example:

@lisp
#!vicare
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(define-constant C
  (make-reverse-comparator exact-integer-comparator))

;; type test
(let ((test-type (comparator-test-type-procedure C)))
  (test-type 1)         @result{} #t
  (test-type '())       @result{} #f
  (test-type "ciao"))   @result{} #f

;; type check
(let ((check-type (comparator-check-type-procedure C)))
  (check-type 1)        @result{} #t
  (try
      (check-type (void))
    (catch E
      ((&comparator-type-error)
       #t)
      (else E))))       @result{} #t

;; comparison
(let ((compare (comparator-comparison-procedure C)))
  (compare 1 1)         @result{} 0
  (compare 1 2)         @result{} +1
  (compare 2 1)         @result{} -1)

;; hash
(let ((hash (comparator-hash-function C)))
  (non-negative-exact-integer? (hash 1)))       @result{} #t
@end lisp

@c page
@node srfi comparators constructors debug
@subsubsection Debug comparators


@defun make-debug-comparator @var{comparator}
Return a comparator that behaves exactly like @var{comparator}, except
that whenever any of its procedures are invoked, it verifies all the
programmer responsibilities (except stability), and an error is
signalled if any of them are violated.  Because it requires three
arguments, transitivity is not tested on the first call to a debug
comparator; it is tested on all future calls using an arbitrarily chosen
argument from the previous invocation.  Note that this may cause
unexpected storage leaks.
@end defun

@c page
@node srfi comparators wrapped
@subsection Wrapped equality predicates


@defun eq-comparator
@defunx eqv-comparator
@defunx equal-comparator
The equality predicates of these comparators are @func{eq?},
@func{eqv?}, and @func{equal?} respectively.

Comparison is @strong{not} supported by these comparators: when their
comparison procedures are applied to any objects: an exception is raised
with condition object of type
@condition{unsupported-comparator-operation-error}.

These comparators accept circular structures and @code{+nan.0} values.
@end defun

@c page
@node srfi comparators accessors
@subsection Accessors


@defun comparator-type-test-procedure @var{comparator}
@defunx comparator-test-type-procedure @var{comparator}
Return the type test predicate of @var{comparator}.
@end defun


@defun comparator-check-type-procedure @var{comparator}
@defunx comparator-type-check-procedure @var{comparator}
Return the type check procedure of @var{comparator}.  The returned
procedure can be called with one or two arguments:

@itemize
@item
When called with one argument @var{obj}: it invokes the type test
predicate of @var{comparator} on @var{obj} and returns @true{} if it
returns @true{}; otherwise it signals an error.

@item
When called with two arguments @var{obj} and @var{who}: it invokes the
type test predicate of @var{comparator} on @var{obj} and returns @true{}
if it returns @true{}; otherwise it signals an error.  The optional
argument @var{who} must be compatible with the argument of
@func{make-who-condition} and it is used to raise a descriptive
exception when @var{obj} does not match the comparator.
@end itemize

@quotation
@strong{NOTE} This procedure is a @value{PRJNAME} extension.
@end quotation
@end defun


@defun comparator-equality-predicate @var{comparator}
Return the equality predicate of @var{comparator}.
@end defun


@defun comparator-comparison-procedure @var{comparator}
Return the comparison procedure of @var{comparator}.
@end defun


@defun comparator-hash-function @var{comparator}
Return the hash function of @var{comparator}.
@end defun

@c page
@node srfi comparators applicators
@subsection Primitive applicators


@defun comparator-test-type @var{comparator} @var{obj}
Invoke the type test predicate of @var{comparator} on @var{obj} and
return what it returns.
@end defun


@defun comparator-check-type @var{comparator} @var{obj}
@defunx comparator-check-type @var{comparator} @var{obj} @var{who}
Invoke the type test predicate of @var{comparator} on @var{obj} and
return @true{} if it returns @true{}; otherwise signal an error.

As a @value{PRJNAME} extension: the optional argument @var{who} must be
compatible with the argument of @func{make-who-condition} and it is used
to raise a descriptive exception when @var{obj} does not match the
comparator.
@end defun


@defun comparator-equal? @var{comparator} @vari{obj} @varii{obj}
Invoke the equality predicate of @var{comparator} on @vari{obj} and
@varii{obj} and return what it returns.
@end defun


@defun comparator-compare @var{comparator} @vari{obj} @varii{obj}
Invoke the comparison procedure of @var{comparator} on @vari{obj} and
@varii{obj} and return what it returns.
@end defun


@defun comparator-hash @var{comparator} @var{obj}
Invoke the hash function of @var{comparator} on @var{obj} and return
what it returns.
@end defun

@c page
@node srfi comparators compar proc
@subsection Comparison procedure constructors


@defun make-comparison< @var{lt-pred}
@defunx make-comparison> @var{gt-pred}
@defunx make-comparison<= @var{le-pred}
@defunx make-comparison>= @var{ge-pred}
@defunx make-comparison=/< @var{eq-pred} @var{lt-pred}
@defunx make-comparison=/> @var{eq-pred} @var{gt-pred}
These procedures return a comparison procedure, given a less--than
predicate, a greater--than predicate, a less--than--or--equal--to
predicate, a greater--than--or--equal--to predicate, or the combination
of an equality predicate and either a less--than or a greater--than
predicate.

They are the same as the corresponding @ansrfi{67} @func{compare-by}
procedures.  Note that they do not accept comparand arguments.
@end defun


Usage examples:

@lisp
#!vicare
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(let ((compare (make-comparison< fx<?)))
  (compare 1 1)        @result{} 0
  (compare 1 2)        @result{} -1
  (compare 2 1))       @result{} +1

(let ((compare (make-comparison> fx>?)))
  (compare 1 1)        @result{} 0
  (compare 1 2)        @result{} -1
  (compare 2 1))       @result{} +1

(let ((compare (make-comparison<= fx<=?)))
  (compare 1 1)        @result{} 0
  (compare 1 2)        @result{} -1
  (compare 2 1))       @result{} +1

(let ((compare (make-comparison>= fx>=?)))
  (compare 1 1)        @result{} 0
  (compare 1 2)        @result{} -1
  (compare 2 1))       @result{} +1

(let ((compare (make-comparison=/< fx=? fx<?)))
  (compare 1 1)        @result{} 0
  (compare 1 2)        @result{} -1
  (compare 2 1))       @result{} +1

(let ((compare (make-comparison=/> fx=? fx>?)))
  (compare 1 1)        @result{} 0
  (compare 1 2)        @result{} -1
  (compare 2 1))       @result{} +1
@end lisp

@c page
@node srfi comparators syntax
@subsection Comparison syntax


The following expression types allow the convenient use of comparison
procedures.  They come directly from @ansrfi{67}.


@deffn Syntax if3 @meta{expr} @meta{less} @meta{equal} @meta{greater}
The expression @meta{expr} is evaluated; it will typically, but not
necessarily, be a call on a comparison procedure.

@itemize
@item
If the result is @code{-1}: @meta{less} is evaluated and its values are
returned.

@item
If the result is @code{0}: @meta{equal} is evaluated and its values
are returned.

@item
If the result is @code{+1}: @meta{greater} is evaluated and its values
are returned.

@item
Otherwise an error is signalled.
@end itemize

Usage examples:

@lisp
#!vicare
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(if3 (compare 1 1) 'less 'equal 'greater)       @result{} equal
(if3 (compare 1 2) 'less 'equal 'greater)       @result{} less
(if3 (compare 2 1) 'less 'equal 'greater)       @result{} greater
@end lisp
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax if=? @meta{expr} @meta{consequent}
@deffnx Syntax if=? @meta{expr} @meta{consequent} @meta{alternate}
@deffnx Syntax if<? @meta{expr} @meta{consequent}
@deffnx Syntax if<? @meta{expr} @meta{consequent} @meta{alternate}
@deffnx Syntax if>? @meta{expr} @meta{consequent}
@deffnx Syntax if>? @meta{expr} @meta{consequent} @meta{alternate}
@deffnx Syntax if<=? @meta{expr} @meta{consequent}
@deffnx Syntax if<=? @meta{expr} @meta{consequent} @meta{alternate}
@deffnx Syntax if>=? @meta{expr} @meta{consequent}
@deffnx Syntax if>=? @meta{expr} @meta{consequent} @meta{alternate}
@deffnx Syntax if-not=? @meta{expr} @meta{consequent}
@deffnx Syntax if-not=? @meta{expr} @meta{consequent} @meta{alternate}
The expression @meta{expr} is evaluated; it will typically, but not
necessarily, be a call on a comparison procedure.

@itemize
@item
It is an error if the return value of @meta{expr} is not @code{-1},
@code{0}, or @code{+1}.

@item
If the return value @strong{is} consistent with the specified relation:
@meta{consequent} is evaluated and its values are returned.

@item
If the return value @strong{it not} consistent with the specified
relation:

@itemize -
If @meta{alternate} is present: it is evaluated and its values are
returned.

@item
If @meta{alternate} is absent: an unspecified value is returned.
@end itemize
@end itemize

Usage examples:

@lisp
#!vicare
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(if=? (compare 1 1) #t #f)      @result{} #t
(if=? (compare 1 2) #t #f)      @result{} #f
(if=? (compare 2 1) #t #f)      @result{} #f

(if=? (compare 1 1) #t)         @result{} #t
(if=? (compare 1 2) #t)         @result{} #<void>
(if=? (compare 2 1) #t)         @result{} #<void>

;;;

(if-not=? (compare 1 1) #f #t)  @result{} #t
(if-not=? (compare 1 2) #f #t)  @result{} #f
(if-not=? (compare 2 1) #f #t)  @result{} #f

(if-not=? (compare 1 1) #t)     @result{} #<void>
(if-not=? (compare 1 2) #t)     @result{} #t
(if-not=? (compare 2 1) #t)     @result{} #t

;;;

(if<? (compare 1 1) #t #f)      @result{} #f
(if<? (compare 1 2) #t #f)      @result{} #t
(if<? (compare 2 1) #t #f)      @result{} #f

(if<? (compare 1 1) #t)         @result{} #<void>
(if<? (compare 1 2) #t)         @result{} #t
(if<? (compare 2 1) #t)         @result{} #<void>

;;;

(if>? (compare 1 1) #t #f)      @result{} #f
(if>? (compare 1 2) #t #f)      @result{} #f
(if>? (compare 2 1) #t #f)      @result{} #t

(if>? (compare 1 1) #t)         @result{} #<void>
(if>? (compare 1 2) #t)         @result{} #<void>
(if>? (compare 2 1) #t)         @result{} #t

;;;

(if<=? (compare 1 1) #t #f)     @result{} #t
(if<=? (compare 1 2) #t #f)     @result{} #t
(if<=? (compare 2 1) #t #f)     @result{} #f

(if<=? (compare 1 1) #t)        @result{} #t
(if<=? (compare 1 2) #t)        @result{} #t
(if<=? (compare 2 1) #t)        @result{} #<void>

;;;

(if>=? (compare 1 1) #t #f)     @result{} #t
(if>=? (compare 1 2) #t #f)     @result{} #f
(if>=? (compare 2 1) #t #f)     @result{} #t

(if>=? (compare 1 1) #t)        @result{} #t
(if>=? (compare 1 2) #t)        @result{} #<void>
(if>=? (compare 2 1) #t)        @result{} #t
@end lisp
@end deffn

@c page
@node srfi comparators compar pred
@subsection Comparison predicates and predicate constructors


@defun =? @var{comparator} @vari{obj} @varii{obj} @variii{obj} @dots{}
@defunx <? @var{comparator} @vari{obj} @varii{obj} @variii{obj} @dots{}
@defunx >? @var{comparator} @vari{obj} @varii{obj} @variii{obj} @dots{}
@defunx <=? @var{comparator} @vari{obj} @varii{obj} @variii{obj} @dots{}
@defunx >=? @var{comparator} @vari{obj} @varii{obj} @variii{obj} @dots{}
These procedures are analogous to the number, character, and string
comparison predicates of Scheme.  They allow the convenient use of
comparators in situations where the expression types are not usable.
They are also analogous to the similarly named procedures of
@ansrfi{67}, but handle arbitrary numbers of arguments, which in
@ansrfi{67} requires the use of the variants whose names begin with
@code{chain}.

These procedures apply the comparison procedure of @var{comparator} to
the objects as follows: if the specified relation returns @true{} for
all @varj{obj} and @vark{obj} where @math{1 <= j < k <= N} and @math{N}
is the number of objects, then the procedures return @true{}; otherwise
return @false{}.

The order in which the values are compared is unspecified.  Because the
relations are transitive, it suffices to compare each object with its
successor.

Usage examples:

@lisp
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(define-constant C fixnum-comparator)

;;;

(=? C 1 1)      @result{} #t
(=? C 1 2)      @result{} #f
(=? C 2 1)      @result{} #f

(=? C 1 1 1)    @result{} #t
(=? C 1 2 3)    @result{} #f
(=? C 2 1 3)    @result{} #f
(=? C 3 2 1)    @result{} #f
(=? C 1 3 2)    @result{} #f

;;;

(<? C 1 1)      @result{} #f
(<? C 1 2)      @result{} #t
(<? C 2 1)      @result{} #f

(<? C 1 1 1)    @result{} #f
(<? C 1 2 3)    @result{} #t
(<? C 2 1 3)    @result{} #f
(<? C 3 2 1)    @result{} #f
(<? C 1 3 2)    @result{} #f

;;;

(>? C 1 1)      @result{} #f
(>? C 1 2)      @result{} #f
(>? C 2 1)      @result{} #t

(>? C 1 1 1)    @result{} #f
(>? C 3 2 1)    @result{} #t
(>? C 1 2 3)    @result{} #f
(>? C 2 1 3)    @result{} #f
(>? C 1 3 2)    @result{} #f

;;;

(<=? C 1 1)     @result{} #t
(<=? C 1 2)     @result{} #t
(<=? C 2 1)     @result{} #f

(<=? C 1 1 1)   @result{} #t
(<=? C 1 2 3)   @result{} #t
(<=? C 2 1 3)   @result{} #f
(<=? C 3 2 1)   @result{} #f
(<=? C 1 3 2)   @result{} #f

;;;

(>=? C 1 1)     @result{} #t
(>=? C 1 2)     @result{} #f
(>=? C 2 1)     @result{} #t

(>=? C 1 1 1)   @result{} #t
(>=? C 3 2 1)   @result{} #t
(>=? C 1 2 3)   @result{} #f
(>=? C 2 1 3)   @result{} #f
(>=? C 1 3 2)   @result{} #f
@end lisp
@end defun


@defun make= @var{comparator}
@defunx make< @var{comparator}
@defunx make> @var{comparator}
@defunx make<= @var{comparator}
@defunx make>= @var{comparator}
These procedures return predicates which, when applied to two or more
arguments, return @true{} if comparing the arguments using the equality
or comparison procedures of @var{comparator} shows that the objects bear
the specified relation to one another.  Such predicates can be used in
contexts that do not understand or expect comparators.

Usage examples:

@lisp
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(define-constant C fixnum-comparator)

;;;

(let ((fun=? (make= C)))
  (fun=? 1 1)           @result{} #t
  (fun=? 1 2)           @result{} #f
  (fun=? 2 1)           @result{} #f

  (fun=? 1 1 1)         @result{} #t
  (fun=? 1 2 3)         @result{} #f
  (fun=? 2 1 3)         @result{} #f
  (fun=? 3 2 1)         @result{} #f
  (fun=? 1 3 2))        @result{} #f

;;;

(let ((fun<? (make< C)))
  (fun<? 1 1)           @result{} #f
  (fun<? 1 2)           @result{} #t
  (fun<? 2 1)           @result{} #f

  (fun<? 1 1 1)         @result{} #f
  (fun<? 1 2 3)         @result{} #t
  (fun<? 2 1 3)         @result{} #f
  (fun<? 3 2 1)         @result{} #f
  (fun<? 1 3 2))        @result{} #f

;;;

(let ((fun>? (make> C)))
  (fun>? 1 1)           @result{} #f
  (fun>? 1 2)           @result{} #f
  (fun>? 2 1)           @result{} #t

  (fun>? 1 1 1)         @result{} #f
  (fun>? 3 2 1)         @result{} #t
  (fun>? 1 2 3)         @result{} #f
  (fun>? 2 1 3)         @result{} #f
  (fun>? 1 3 2))        @result{} #f

;;;

(let ((fun<=? (make<= C)))
  (fun<=? 1 1)          @result{} #t
  (fun<=? 1 2)          @result{} #t
  (fun<=? 2 1)          @result{} #f

  (fun<=? 1 1 1)        @result{} #t
  (fun<=? 1 2 3)        @result{} #t
  (fun<=? 2 1 3)        @result{} #f
  (fun<=? 3 2 1)        @result{} #f
  (fun<=? 1 3 2))       @result{} #f

;;;

(let ((fun>=? (make>= C)))
  (fun>=? 1 1)          @result{} #t
  (fun>=? 1 2)          @result{} #f
  (fun>=? 2 1)          @result{} #t

  (fun>=? 1 1 1)        @result{} #t
  (fun>=? 3 2 1)        @result{} #t
  (fun>=? 1 2 3)        @result{} #f
  (fun>=? 2 1 3)        @result{} #f
  (fun>=? 1 3 2))       @result{} #f
@end lisp
@end defun

@c page
@node srfi comparators ternary
@subsection Interval (ternary) comparison predicates


These procedures return @true{} or @false{} depending on whether an
object is contained in an open, closed, or half--open interval.  All
comparisons are done in the sense of @var{comparator}, which is
@func{default-comparator} if omitted.


@defun in-open-interval? @vari{obj} @varii{obj} @variii{obj}
@defunx in-open-interval? @var{comparator} @vari{obj} @varii{obj} @variii{obj}
Return @true{} if @vari{obj} is less than @varii{obj}, which is less
than @variii{obj}; otherwise return @false{}.

Usage examples:

@lisp
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(define-constant C fixnum-comparator)

(in-open-interval? 1 2 3)       @result{} #t
(in-open-interval? 1 1 3)       @result{} #f
(in-open-interval? 1 3 3)       @result{} #f

(in-open-interval? 1 0 3)       @result{} #f
(in-open-interval? 1 0 3)       @result{} #f
(in-open-interval? 1 0 3)       @result{} #f

(in-open-interval? 1 9 3)       @result{} #f
(in-open-interval? 1 9 3)       @result{} #f
(in-open-interval? 1 9 3)       @result{} #f

(in-open-interval? C 1 2 3)     @result{} #t
(in-open-interval? C 1 1 3)     @result{} #f
(in-open-interval? C 1 3 3)     @result{} #f

(in-open-interval? C 1 0 3)     @result{} #f
(in-open-interval? C 1 0 3)     @result{} #f
(in-open-interval? C 1 0 3)     @result{} #f

(in-open-interval? C 1 9 3)     @result{} #f
(in-open-interval? C 1 9 3)     @result{} #f
(in-open-interval? C 1 9 3)     @result{} #f
@end lisp
@end defun


@defun in-closed-interval? @vari{obj} @varii{obj} @variii{obj}
@defunx in-closed-interval? @var{comparator} @vari{obj} @varii{obj} @variii{obj}
Return @true{} if @vari{obj} is less than or equal to @varii{obj}, which
is less than or equal to @variii{obj}; otherwise return @false{}.

Usage examples:

@lisp
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(define-constant C fixnum-comparator)

(in-closed-interval? 1 2 3)     @result{} #t
(in-closed-interval? 1 1 3)     @result{} #t
(in-closed-interval? 1 3 3)     @result{} #t

(in-closed-interval? 1 0 3)     @result{} #f
(in-closed-interval? 1 0 3)     @result{} #f
(in-closed-interval? 1 0 3)     @result{} #f

(in-closed-interval? 1 9 3)     @result{} #f
(in-closed-interval? 1 9 3)     @result{} #f
(in-closed-interval? 1 9 3)     @result{} #f

(in-closed-interval? C 1 2 3)   @result{} #t
(in-closed-interval? C 1 1 3)   @result{} #t
(in-closed-interval? C 1 3 3)   @result{} #t

(in-closed-interval? C 1 0 3)   @result{} #f
(in-closed-interval? C 1 0 3)   @result{} #f
(in-closed-interval? C 1 0 3)   @result{} #f

(in-closed-interval? C 1 9 3)   @result{} #f
(in-closed-interval? C 1 9 3)   @result{} #f
(in-closed-interval? C 1 9 3)   @result{} #f
@end lisp
@end defun


@defun in-open-closed-interval? @vari{obj} @varii{obj} @variii{obj}
@defunx in-open-closed-interval? @var{comparator} @vari{obj} @varii{obj} @variii{obj}
Return @true{} if @vari{obj} is less than @varii{obj}, which is less
than or equal to @variii{obj}; otherwise return @false{}.

Usage examples:

@lisp
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(define-constant C fixnum-comparator)

(in-open-closed-interval? 1 2 3)        @result{} #t
(in-open-closed-interval? 1 1 3)        @result{} #f
(in-open-closed-interval? 1 3 3)        @result{} #t

(in-open-closed-interval? 1 0 3)        @result{} #f
(in-open-closed-interval? 1 0 3)        @result{} #f
(in-open-closed-interval? 1 0 3)        @result{} #f

(in-open-closed-interval? 1 9 3)        @result{} #f
(in-open-closed-interval? 1 9 3)        @result{} #f
(in-open-closed-interval? 1 9 3)        @result{} #f

(in-open-closed-interval? C 1 2 3)      @result{} #t
(in-open-closed-interval? C 1 1 3)      @result{} #f
(in-open-closed-interval? C 1 3 3)      @result{} #t

(in-open-closed-interval? C 1 0 3)      @result{} #f
(in-open-closed-interval? C 1 0 3)      @result{} #f
(in-open-closed-interval? C 1 0 3)      @result{} #f

(in-open-closed-interval? C 1 9 3)      @result{} #f
(in-open-closed-interval? C 1 9 3)      @result{} #f
(in-open-closed-interval? C 1 9 3)      @result{} #f
@end lisp
@end defun


@defun in-closed-open-interval? @vari{obj} @varii{obj} @variii{obj}
@defunx in-closed-open-interval? @var{comparator} @vari{obj} @varii{obj} @variii{obj}
Return @true{} if @vari{obj} is less than or equal to @varii{obj}, which
is less than @variii{obj}; otherwise return @false{}.

Usage examples:

@lisp
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(define-constant C fixnum-comparator)

(in-closed-open-interval? 1 2 3)        @result{} #t
(in-closed-open-interval? 1 1 3)        @result{} #t
(in-closed-open-interval? 1 3 3)        @result{} #f

(in-closed-open-interval? 1 0 3)        @result{} #f
(in-closed-open-interval? 1 0 3)        @result{} #f
(in-closed-open-interval? 1 0 3)        @result{} #f

(in-closed-open-interval? 1 9 3)        @result{} #f
(in-closed-open-interval? 1 9 3)        @result{} #f
(in-closed-open-interval? 1 9 3)        @result{} #f

(in-closed-open-interval? C 1 2 3)      @result{} #t
(in-closed-open-interval? C 1 1 3)      @result{} #t
(in-closed-open-interval? C 1 3 3)      @result{} #f

(in-closed-open-interval? C 1 0 3)      @result{} #f
(in-closed-open-interval? C 1 0 3)      @result{} #f
(in-closed-open-interval? C 1 0 3)      @result{} #f

(in-closed-open-interval? C 1 9 3)      @result{} #f
(in-closed-open-interval? C 1 9 3)      @result{} #f
(in-closed-open-interval? C 1 9 3)      @result{} #f
@end lisp
@end defun

@c page
@node srfi comparators minmax
@subsection Min/max comparison procedures


@defun comparator-min @var{comparator} @varo{obj} @vari{obj} @dots{}
@defunx comparator-max @var{comparator} @varo{obj} @vari{obj} @dots{}
Analogous to @func{min} and @func{max}.  Apply the comparison procedure
of @var{comparator} to the arguments to find and return a minimal (or
maximal) object.  The order in which the values are compared is
unspecified.

@quotation
@strong{NOTE} The @ansrfi{67} procedures @func{pairwise-not=?} and
@func{kth-largest} involve sorting their arguments, and are not provided
by this proposal in order to avoid an otherwise unnecessary
implementation dependency.  They are easily provided by a sorting
package that makes use of comparators.
@end quotation

Usage examples:

@lisp
(import (vicare) (srfi :114))

(comparator-min C 0)           @result{} 0
(comparator-min C 0 0)         @result{} 0
(comparator-min C 0 1)         @result{} 0
(comparator-min C 1 0)         @result{} 0
(comparator-min C 0 1 2)       @result{} 0
@end lisp
@end defun

@c page
@node srfi comparators misc
@subsection Miscellaneous procedures


@defun make-comparator-hashtable @var{comparator}
Build and return a new hashtable using the equality predicate and hash
function from @var{comparator}.

@quotation
@strong{NOTE} This is a @value{PRJNAME} extension.
@end quotation
@end defun

@c page
@node srfi comparators conditions
@subsection Condition object types


As @value{PRJNAME} extension the following condition objects are
defined.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------

@unnumberedsubsec Comparator error

@deftp {Condition Object Type} &comparator-error
Used to signal an error while using a comparator's facilities.  It is
derived from @condition{error}.
@end deftp


@defun make-comparator-error @var{compar} @var{obj}
Build and return a new condition object of type
@condition{comparator-error}.
@end defun


@defun comparator-error? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a condition object of type
@condition{comparator-error}; otherwise return @false{}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------

@unnumberedsubsec Unsupported operation error

@deftp {Condition Object Type} &unsupported-comparator-operation-error
Used to signal an attempt to use an unsupported operation.  It is
derived from @condition{comparator-ertor}.

It has the following fields:

@table @code
@item comparator
The comparator that does not support the operation.
@end table
@end deftp


@defun make-unsupported-comparator-operation-error @var{comparator}
Build and return a new condition object of type
@condition{unsupported-comparator-operation-error}.
@end defun


@defun unsupported-comparator-operation-error? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a condition object of type
@condition{unsupported-comparator-operation-error}; otherwise return
@false{}.
@end defun


@defun unsupported-comparator-operation-error.comparator @var{cnd}
Accessor for the field of condition objects of type
@condition{unsupported-comparator-operation-error}.
@end defun


@defun raise-unsupported-comparator-operation-error @var{who} @var{message} @var{comparator} @var{irritant} @dots{}
Raise a non--continuable exception with compound condition object of
types: @condition{who}, @condition{message},
@condition{unsupported-comparator-operation-error},
@condition{irritants}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------

@unnumberedsubsec Comparator type error

@deftp {Condition Object Type} &comparator-type-error
Used to signal an attempt to use the facilities of a comparator with an
object that does not satisfy the comparator's type predicate.  It is
derived from @condition{comparator-error}.  It has two fields:

@table @code
@item comparator
The comparator object.

@item objects
List of objects with which the comparator was used.
@end table
@end deftp


@defun make-comparator-type-error @var{compar} @var{obj}
Build and return a new condition object of type
@condition{comparator-type-error}.
@end defun


@defun comparator-type-error? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a condition object of type
@condition{comparator-type-error}; otherwise return @false{}.
@end defun


@deffn {Condition Object Accessor} comparator-type-error.comparator @var{cond}
@deffnx {Condition Object Accessor} comparator-type-error.objects @var{cond}
Accessors for the fields of condition objects of type
@condition{comparator-type-error}.
@end deffn


@defun raise-comparator-type-error @var{who} @var{message} @var{comparator} @var{object} @dots{}
Raise a non--continuable exception with compound condition object of
types: @condition{who}, @condition{message},
@condition{comparator-type-error}, @condition{irritants}.
@end defun


@defun raise-comparator-argument-type-error @var{who} @var{message} @var{comparator} @var{object} @dots{}
Raise a non--continuable exception with compound condition object of
types: @condition{who}, @condition{message},
@condition{comparator-type-error}, @condition{irritants},
@condition{procedure-argument-violation}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------

@unnumberedsubsec Not--a--number comparison error

@deftp {Condition Object Type} &comparator-nan-comparison-error
Used to signal an invalid comparison in which one of the operands is
@code{+nan.0}.  It is derived from @condition{comparator-error}.

It has the following fields:

@table @code
@item comparator
The comparator object that was used for the comparison.
@end table
@end deftp


@defun make-comparator-nan-comparison-error-condition @var{comparator}
Build and return a new condition object of type
@condition{comparator-nan-comparison-error}.
@end defun


@defun condition-comparator-nan-comparison-error? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a condition object of type
@condition{comparator-nan-comparison-error}; otherwise return @false{}.
@end defun


@defun comparator-nan-comparison-error.comparator @var{cnd}
Accessor for the field of condition objects of type
@condition{comparator-nan-comparison-error}.
@end defun


@defun raise-comparator-nan-comparison-error @var{who} @var{message} @var{comparator}
Raise a non--continuable exception with compound condition object of
types: @condition{who}, @condition{message}, @condition{irritants},
@condition{comparator-nan-comparison-error}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------

@unnumberedsubsec Comparator error

@deftp {Condition Object Type} &inexact-real-comparator-with-ignored-epsilon
Used to signal that a non-false @var{epsilon} argument was used with a
symbolic @var{rounding} argument in the call to
@func{make-inexact-real-comparator}: in this case @var{epsilon} is
ignored.

It has the following fields:

@table @code
@item epsilon
The @var{epsilon} argument.

@item rounding
The @var{rounding} argument.  A symbol among: @code{floor},
@code{ceiling}, @code{truncate}, @code{round}.
@end table
@end deftp


@defun make-inexact-real-comparator-with-ignored-epsilon-condition @var{epsilon} @var{rounding}
Build and return a condition object of type
@condition{inexact-real-comparator-with-ignored-epsilon}.  It is derived
from @condition{warning}.
@end defun


@defun condition-inexact-real-comparator-with-ignored-epsilon? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a condition object of type
@condition{inexact-real-comparator-with-ignored-epsilon}; otherwise
return @false{}.
@end defun


@defun inexact-real-comparator-with-ignored-epsilon.epsilon @var{cnd}
@defunx inexact-real-comparator-with-ignored-epsilon.rounding @var{cnd}
Field accessors for condition object of type
@condition{inexact-real-comparator-with-ignored-epsilon}.
@end defun

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------

@unnumberedsubsec Debug comparator error

@deftp {Condition Object Type} &comparator-debug-error
Used to signal errors raised by comparators returned by
@func{make-debug-comparator}.  It is derived from
@condition{comparator-error}.

It has the following fields:

@table @code
@item debug-comparator
The debug comparator that raised the error.

@item comparator
The comparator that violated the requirements.
@end table
@end deftp


@defun make-comparator-debug-error @var{debug-comparator} @var{comparator}
Build and return a new condition object of type
@condition{comparator-debug-error}.
@end defun


@defun comparator-debug-error? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a condition object of type
@condition{comparator-debug-error}; otherwise return @false{}.
@end defun


@defun comparator-debug-error.debug-comparator @var{cnd}
@defunx comparator-debug-error.comparator @var{cnd}
Accessors for the fields of @condition{comparator-debug-error}.
@end defun


@defun raise-comparator-debug-error @var{who} @var{message} @var{debug-comparator} @var{comparator} @var{irritant} @dots{}
Raise a non--continuable exception with compound condition object of
types: @condition{who}, @condition{message},
@condition{comparator-debug-error}, @condition{irritants}.
@end defun

@c page
@node srfi comparators copyright
@subsection Copyright


Copyright @copyright{} John Cowan 2013. All Rights Reserved.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

@c Local Variables:
@c mode: texinfo
@c TeX-master: "vicare-libs"
@c End:
