@node srfi lightweight-testing
@section @ansrfi{78} lightweight testing


@cindex @ansrfi{78} lightweight testing


The library @library{srfi :78} are written by Sebastian Egner as the
reference implementation for @ansrfi{78}; see:

@center @url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-78/srfi-78.html}

@noindent
for more details.

@menu
* srfi lightweight-testing license::    Original document license.
* srfi lightweight-testing abstract::   Abstract.
* srfi lightweight-testing rationale::  Rationale.
* srfi lightweight-testing spec::       Specification.
* srfi lightweight-testing references:: References.
@end menu

@c page
@node srfi lightweight-testing license
@subsection Original document license


Copyright @copyright{} 2005--2006 Sebastian Egner.  All Rights Reserved.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

@c page
@node srfi lightweight-testing abstract
@subsection Abstract


A simple mechanism is defined for testing Scheme programs.  As a most
primitive example, the expression:

@example
(check (+ 1 1) => 3)
@end example

@noindent
evaluates the expression @code{(+ 1 1)} and compares the result with the
expected result @code{3} provided after the syntactic keyword @code{=>}.
Then the outcome of this comparison is reported in human--readable form
by printing a message of the form:

@example
(+ 1 1) => 2 ; *** failed ***
; expected result: 3
@end example

Moreover, the outcome of any executed check is recorded in a global
state counting the number of correct and failed checks and storing the
first failed check.  At the end of a file, or at any other point, the
user can print a summary using @func{check-report}.

In addition to the simple test above, it is also possible to execute a
parametric sequence of checks.  Syntactically, this takes the form of an
eager comprehension in the sense of @ansrfi{42}.  For example:

@example
(check-ec (:range e 100)
          (:let x (expt 2.0 e))
  (= (+ x 1) x) => #f (e x))
@end example

This statement runs the variable e through @code{@{0..99@}} and for each
binding defines @var{x} as @code{(expt 2.0 e)}.  Then it is checked if
@code{(+ x 1)} is equal to @var{x}, and it is expected that this is not
the case (i.e. expected value is @false{}).  The trailing @code{(e x)}
tells the reporting mechanism to print the values of both @var{e} and
@var{x} in case of a failed check.  The output could look like this:

@example
(let ((e 53) (x 9007199254740992.0)) (= (+ x 1) x)) => #t ; *** failed ***
; expected result: #f
@end example

The specification of bindings to report, @code{(e x)} in the example, is
optional but very informative.  Other features of this @srfi{} are:

@itemize
@item
a way to specify a different equality predicate (default is
@func{equal?});

@item
controlling the amount of reporting being printed;

@item
switching off the execution and reporting of checks entriely;

@item
retrieving a boolean if all checks have been executed and passed.
@end itemize

@c page
@node srfi lightweight-testing rationale
@subsection Rationale


The mechanism defined in this @srfi{} should be available in every
Scheme system because it has already proven useful for interactive
development----of @srfi{}s.

Although it is extremely straightforward, the origin of the particular
mechanism described here is the @file{examples.scm} file accompanying
the reference implementation of @ansrfi{42}.  The same mechanism has been
reimplemented for the reference implementation of @srfi{67}, and a
simplified version is yet again found in the reference implementation of
@ansrfi{77}.

The mechanism in this @srfi{} does not replace more sophisticated
approaches to unit testing, like @srfi{64} or SchemeUnit.  These
systems provide more control of the testing, separate the definition of
a test, its execution, and its reports, and provide several other
features.

Neil Van Dyke's Testeez library is very close in spirit to this
@srfi{}.  In Testeez, tests are disabled by (re--)defining a macro.
The advantage of this method is that the code for the test cases can be
removed entirely, and hence even the dependency on the Testeez library.
This @srfi{} on the other hand, uses a Scheme conditional @code{(cond,
if)} to prevent execution of the testing code.  This method is more
dynamic but retains dead testing code, unless a compiler and a module
system are used to apply constant folding and dead code elimination.
The only major addition in @srfi{} over Testeez is the comprehension
for formulating parametric tests.

Design considerations for this @srfi{} include the following:

@itemize
@item
Reporting is human--readable and as specific as possible, i.e. not just
``assertion failed'' but the expression with actual and expected value,
and if possibly the relevant part of the bindings environment.

@item
An effort is made to print closed Scheme expressions, i.e. expressions
that can directly be copy/pasted into a @repl{} for further analysis
(e.g. the let expression in the abstract).

@item
By default the checks report both correct and failed checks.  However,
it is possible to reduce the output, or even to switch off the execution
of checks.  It has turned out useful to be able to run only some subset
checks for the features currently under development.  This can be done
by changing the reporting mode between differnt sections.

@item
The global state (correct/failed count) is not made available to the
user program.  This reduces the dependencies between different checks
because it is not possible to use the state.

@item
Ocassionally, it is useful to check that a certain expression does not
yield an ordinary result but raises an error.  However, @rnrs{5} does
not specify the mechanism by which this occurs (e.g. raising exception,
breaking into a @repl{}, aborting the program, etc.).  For this reason,
this @srfi{} is restricted to the case that the checked expressions
evaluate normally.

@item
Though usually I am very much in favor of strictly prefix syntax, for
this @srfi{} I make an exception because the infix @code{=>} syntax is
widely used and intuitive.
@end itemize

@c page
@node srfi lightweight-testing spec
@subsection Specification


@deffn Syntax check @var{expr} (=> @var{equal}) @var{expected}
@deffnx Syntax check @var{expr} => @var{expected}
Evaluate @var{expr} and compare the value to the value of @var{expected}
using the predicate @var{equal}, which is @func{equal?} when omitted.
Then a report is printed according to the current mode setting (see
below) and the outcome is recorded in a global state to be used in
@func{check-report}.

The precise order of evaluation is that first @var{equal} and
@var{expected} are evaluated (in unspecified order) and then @var{expr}
is evaluated.  Example: @code{(check (+ 1 1) => 2)}.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax check-ec @var{qualifier*} @var{expr} (=> @var{equal}) @var{expected} (@var{argument*}))
@deffnx Syntax check-ec @var{qualifier*} @var{expr} => @var{expected} (@var{argument*})
@deffnx Syntax check-ec @var{qualifier*} @var{expr} (=> @var{equal}) @var{expected}
@deffnx Syntax check-ec @var{qualifier*} @var{expr} => @var{expected}
An eager comprehension for executing a parametric sequence of checks.

Enumerate the sequence of bindings specified by @var{qualifier*}.  For
each binding evaluate @var{equal} and @var{expected} in unspecified
order. Then evaluate @var{expr} and compare the value obtained to the
value of @var{expected} using the value of @var{equal} as predicate,
which is @func{equal?} when omitted.

The comprehension stops after the first failed check, if there is any.
Then a report is printed according to the current mode setting (see
below) and the outcome is recorded in a global state to be used in
@func{check-report}.  The entire @func{check-ec} counts as a single
check.

In case the check fails @var{argument*} is used for constructing an
informative message with the argument values.  Use @var{argument*} to
list the relevant free variables of @var{expr} (see examples) that you
want to have printed.

A @var{qualifier} is any qualifier of an eager comprehension as
specified in @srfi{42}.

Examples:

@example
(check-ec (: e 100)
          (positive? (expt 2 e))
          => #t (e)) ; fails on fixnums

(check-ec (: e 100)
          (:let x (expt 2.0 e))
          (= (+ x 1) x)
          => #f (x)) ; fails

(check-ec (: x 10)
          (: y 10)
          (: z 10)
          (* x (+ y z))
          => (+ (* x y) (* x z))
             (x y z)) ; passes with 10^3 cases checked
@end example
@end deffn


@defun check-report
Print a summary and the first failed check, if there is any, depending
on the current mode settings.
@end defun


@defun check-set-mode! @var{mode}
Set the current mode to @var{mode}, which must be a symbol among:
@code{off}, @code{summary}, @code{report-failed}, @code{report}; the
default is @code{report}.  Note that you can change the mode at any
time, and that @func{check}, @func{check-ec} and @func{check-report} use
the current value.

The mode symbols have the following meaning:

@table @code
@item off
do not execute any of the checks;

@item summary
print only summary in @func{check-report} and nothing else;

@item report-failed
report failed checks when they happen, and in summary;

@item report
report every example executed.
@end table
@end defun


@defun check-reset!
Reset the global state (counters of correct/failed examples) to the
state immediately after loading the module for the first time, i.e. no
checks have been executed.
@end defun


@defun check-passed? @var{expected-total-count}
Return @true{} if there were no failed checks and
@var{expected-total-count} correct checks, @false{} otherwise.

Rationale: This procedure can be used in automatized tests by
terminating a test program with the statement:

@example
(exit (if (check-passed? n) 0 1))
@end example
@end defun

@c page
@node srfi lightweight-testing references
@subsection References


@emph{@ansrfi{64}: a Scheme @api{} for test suites}. Per Bothner. January,
2005.

@center @url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-64}

@noindent
@emph{SchemeUnit}.  Noel Welsh.  February, 2003.

@center @url{http://schematics.sourceforge.net/schemeunit.html}

@noindent
@emph{Testeez, Lightweight Unit Test Mechanism for Scheme}.  Neil Van
Dyke.  May, 2005.

@center @url{http://www.neilvandyke.org/testeez}

@noindent
@emph{Revised^5 Report on the Algorithmic Language Scheme}.

@center @url{http://www.schemers.org/Documents/Standards/R5RS/}

@noindent
@emph{@ansrfi{42}: eager comprehensions}.  Sebastian Egner.

@center @url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-42}

@c end of file
