@node srfi general-cond
@section @ansrfi{61} a more general @func{cond} clause


@cindex @ansrfi{61} a more general @func{cond} clause


The library @library{srfi :61} are written by Taylor Campbell as the
reference implementation for @ansrfi{61}; see:

@center @url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-61/srfi-61.html}

@noindent
for more details.

@menu
* srfi general-cond license::   Original document license.
* srfi general-cond abstract::  Abstract.
* srfi general-cond rationale:: Rationale.
* srfi general-cond spec::      Specification.
@end menu

@c page
@node srfi general-cond license
@subsection Original document license


Copyright @copyright{} 2004 Taylor Campbell.  All rights reserved.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

@c page
@node srfi general-cond abstract
@subsection Abstract


This @srfi{} proposes an extension to the @func{cond} syntax to allow a
more general clause, one that allows binding the results of tests as in
the @code{=>} clauses and user--defined meaning of the success and
failure of tests.

@c page
@node srfi general-cond rationale
@subsection Rationale


The present set of @func{cond} clauses is based on simple boolean
testing.  It is prohibitively inexpressive in that the condition part of
a @func{cond} clause that uses @code{=>} may pass only a single value to
the receiver, and it enforces a semantics whereby @false{} implies
failure of the condition.

Programmers frequently use different tokens to imply failure, such as in
@rnrs{5}'s I/O readers which return a distinguished ``EOF object'' to
denote failure, and a successful condition may produce more than one
useful value.  This simple extension allows any meaning of ``failure''
to be assigned on a per--clause basis, and it also allows the condition
to return multiple values to be passed to the receiver.

@c page
@node srfi general-cond spec
@subsection Specification


@findex cond

The @code{<cond clause>} production in the formal syntax of Scheme as
written by @rnrs{5} Section 7.1.3 is extended with a new option:

@example
<cond clause> --->
    ...
  | (<generator> <guard> => <receiver>)
@end example

@noindent
where @code{<generator>}, @code{<guard>} and @code{<receiver>} are all
@code{<expression>}.

Clauses of this form have the following semantics: @code{<generator>} is
evaluated and it may return arbitrarily many values.  @code{<guard>} is
applied to an argument list containing the values in order that
@code{<generator>} returned.  If @code{<guard>} returns a true value for
that argument list, @code{<receiver>} is applied with an equivalent
argument list.  If @code{<guard>} returns a false value, however, the
clause is abandoned and the next one is tried.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Examples


This @func{port->char-list} procedure accepts an input port and returns
a list of all the characters it produces until the end.

@example
(define (port->char-list port)
  (cond [(read-char port)
            char?
         => (lambda (c)
              (cons c (port->char-list port)))]
        [else '()]))
@end example

Consider now a hypothetical @func{table-entry} procedure that accepts
two arguments, a table (perhaps a hash table) and a key to an entry that
may be in the table; it returns two values: a boolean that denotes
whether or not an entry with the given key was in the table and, if it
was, the value associated with the key.  Also, a hypothetical
@var{proj0} combinator (projection of argument 0) returns its 0th
argument and ignores all others.  One might conditionally branch to a
certain body of code if the table contains the desired entry like so
with the new type of @func{cond} clause:

@example
(cond ...
      [(table-entry <table> <key>) proj0
       => (lambda (present? value)
            ...[VALUE is bound to the value of the entry]...)]
      ...)
@end example

@c end of file
