@node srfi char-sets
@section @ansrfi{14} character sets


@cindex @srfi{} character sets


The library @library{srfi :14} is by Olin Shivers as the reference
implementation for @ansrfi{14}; see:

@center @url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-14/srfi-14.html}

@noindent
for more details.

@menu
* srfi char-sets abstract::     Abstract.
* srfi char-sets rationale::    Rationale.
* srfi char-sets spec::         Specification.
* srfi char-sets ack::          Acknowledgements.
* srfi char-sets license::      Copyright.
@end menu

@c page
@node srfi char-sets abstract
@subsection Abstract


The ability to efficiently represent and manipulate sets of characters
is an unglamorous but very useful capability for text--processing code;
one that tends to pop up in the definitions of other libraries.  Hence
it is useful to specify a general substrate for this functionality
early.  This @srfi{} defines a general library that provides this
functionality.

@c page
@node srfi char-sets rationale
@subsection Rationale


The ability to efficiently manipulate sets of characters is quite useful
for text--processing code.  Encapsulating this functionality in a
general, efficiently implemented library can assist all such code.  This
library defines a new data structure to represent these sets, called a
@code{char-set}.  The @code{char-set} type is distinct from all other
types.

The procedures of this @srfi{}, by default, are ``pure functional'',
they do not alter their parameters.  However, this @srfi{} defines a set
of ``linear--update'' procedures which have a hybrid
pure--functional/side--effecting semantics: they are allowed, but not
required, to side--effect one of their parameters in order to construct
their result.  An implementation may legally implement these procedures
as pure, side--effect-free functions, or it may implement them using
side effects, depending upon the details of what is the most efficient
or simple to implement in terms of the underlying representation.

The linear--update routines all have names ending with @code{!}.

Clients of these procedures may not rely upon these procedures working
by side effect.  For example, this is not guaranteed to work:

@example
(let* ((cs1 (char-set #\a #\b #\c))      ; cs1 = @{a,b,c@}.
       (cs2 (char-set-adjoin! cs1 #\d))) ; Add d to @{a,b,c@}.
  cs1) ; Could be either @{a,b,c@} or @{a,b,c,d@}.
@end example

However, this is well--defined:

@example
(let ((cs (char-set #\a #\b #\c)))
  (char-set-adjoin! cs #\d)) ; Add d to @{a,b,c@}.
@end example

So clients of these procedures write in a functional style, but must
additionally be sure that, when the procedure is called, there are no
other live pointers to the potentially--modified character set (hence
the term ``linear update'').

There are two benefits to this convention:

@itemize
@item
Implementations are free to provide the most efficient possible
implementation, either functional or side--effecting.

@item
Programmers may nonetheless continue to assume that character sets are
purely functional data structures: they may be reliably shared without
needing to be copied, uniquified, and so forth.
@end itemize

Note that pure functional representations are the right thing for
@ascii{} or Latin-1 based Scheme implementations, since a
@code{char-set} can be represented in an @ascii{} Scheme with @math{4}
32-bit words.  Pure set--algebra operations on such a representation are
very fast and efficient.  Programmers who code using linear--update
operations are guaranteed the system will provide the best
implementation across multiple platforms.

In practice, these procedures are most useful for efficiently
constructing character sets in a side--effecting manner, in some limited
local context, before passing the character set outside the local
construction scope to be used in a functional manner.

Scheme provides no assistance in checking the linearity of the
potentially side--effected parameters passed to these functions; there's
no linear type checker or run--time mechanism for detecting violations.

@c page
@node srfi char-sets spec
@subsection Specification


@menu
* srfi char-sets spec conv::    Conventions.
* srfi char-sets spec general:: General procedures.
* srfi char-sets spec iter::    Iterating over character sets.
* srfi char-sets spec create::  Creating character sets.
* srfi char-sets spec query::   Querying character sets.
* srfi char-sets spec algebra:: Character set algebra.
* srfi char-sets spec std::     Standard character sets.
@end menu

@c page
@node srfi char-sets spec conv
@subsubsection Conventions


In the following procedure specifications a convention to indicate the
type of arguments is used:

@table @var
@item cs
Is a character set.

@item s
Is a string.

@item char
Is a character.

@item char-list
Is a list of characters.

@item pred
Is a unary character predicate procedure, returning a true/false value
when applied to a character.

@item obj
May be any value at all.
@end table

Passing values to procedures with these parameters that do not satisfy
these types is an error.

Unless otherwise noted in the specification of a procedure, procedures
always return character sets that are distinct (from the point of view
of the linear--update operations) from the parameter character sets.
For example, @func{char-set-adjoin} is guaranteed to provide a fresh
character set, even if it is not given any character parameters.

@c page
@node srfi char-sets spec general
@subsubsection General procedures


@defun char-set? @var{obj}
Return @true{} if @var{obj} is a character set, else return @false{}.
@end defun


@defun char-set= @var{cs} ...
Return @true{} if all the arguments are character sets and all are
equal, else return @false{}.  When called with no arguments: return
@true{}; when called with one argument: return @true{}.
@end defun


@defun char-set<= @var{cs} ...
Return @true{} if every character set @var{csi} is a subset of character
set @var{csi+1}, else return @false{}.  When called with zero or one
argument: return @true{}.
@end defun


@defun char-set-hash @var{cs}
@defunx char-set-hash @var{cs} @var{bound}
Compute a hash value for the character set @var{cs}.  The optional
argument @var{bound} is a non--negative exact integer specifying the
range of the hash function; a positive value restricts the return value
to the range @code{[0, @var{bound})}.

If bound is either zero or not given: the implementation may use an
implementation--specific default value, chosen to be as large as is
efficiently practical.  For instance, the default range might be chosen
for a given implementation to map all strings into the range of integers
that can be represented with a single machine word.

Invariant:

@example
(char-set= cs1 cs2) @result{} (= (char-set-hash cs1 b)
                          (char-set-hash cs2 b))
@end example
@end defun

@c page
@node srfi char-sets spec iter
@subsubsection Iterating over character sets


@defun char-set-cursor @var{cs}
@defunx char-set-ref @var{cs} @var{cursor}
@defunx char-set-cursor-next @var{cs} @var{cursor}
@defunx end-of-char-set? @var{cursor}
Cursors are a low--level facility for iterating over the characters in a
set; a cursor is a value that indexes a character in a char set.

@func{char-set-cursor} returns a new cursor object associated to the
character set @var{cs}.  There can be multiple cursors associated to the
same character set.

@func{char-set-ref} returns a character object representing the set
element currently indexed by a cursor.

@func{char-set-cursor-next} increments a cursor index and returns a new
cursor indexing the next character in the set; in this way, code can
step through every character in a char set.

Stepping a cursor ``past the end'' of a char set produces a cursor that
answers true to @func{end-of-char-set?}.  It is an error to pass such a
cursor to @func{char-set-ref} or to @func{char-set-cursor-next}.

A cursor value may not be used in conjunction with a different character
set; if it is passed to @func{char-set-ref} or
@func{char-set-cursor-next} with a character set other than the one used
to create it, the results and effects are undefined.

Cursor values are not necessarily distinct from other types: they may be
integers, linked lists, records, procedures or other values.

Note that these primitives are necessary to export an iteration facility
for char sets to loop macros.

Example:

@example
(define cs (char-set #\G #\a #\T #\e #\c #\h))

;; Collect elts of CS into a list.
(let lp ((cur (char-set-cursor cs)) (ans '()))
  (if (end-of-char-set? cur) ans
      (lp (char-set-cursor-next cs cur)
          (cons (char-set-ref cs cur) ans))))
  @result{} (#\G #\T #\a #\c #\e #\h)

;; Equivalently, using a list unfold (from SRFI 1):
(unfold-right end-of-char-set?
             (curry char-set-ref cs)
      (curry char-set-cursor-next cs)
      (char-set-cursor cs))
  @result{} (#\G #\T #\a #\c #\e #\h)
@end example
@end defun


@defun char-set-fold @var{kons} @var{knil} @var{cs} -> object
This is the fundamental iterator for character sets.  Apply the function
@var{kons} across the character set @var{cs} using initial state value
@var{knil}.

If @var{cs} is the empty set: the return value is @var{knil}.

Otherwise some element @var{c} of @var{cs} is chosen; let @vari{cs} be
the remaining, unchosen characters, the procedure returns:

@example
(char-set-fold @var{kons} (@var{kons} @var{c} @var{knil}) @vari{cs})
@end example

Examples:

@example
;; CHAR-SET-MEMBERS
(lambda (cs) (char-set-fold cons '() cs))

;; CHAR-SET-SIZE
(lambda (cs) (char-set-fold (lambda (c i) (+ i 1)) 0 cs))

;; How many vowels in the char set?
(lambda (cs)
  (char-set-fold (lambda (c i) (if (vowel? c) (+ i 1) i))
                 0 cs))
@end example
@end defun


@defun char-set-unfold @var{f} @var{p} @var{g} @var{seed}
@defunx char-set-unfold @var{f} @var{p} @var{g} @var{seed} @var{base-cs}
@defunx char-set-unfold! @var{f} @var{p} @var{g} @var{seed} @var{base-cs}
This is a fundamental constructor for character sets.

@var{g} is used to generate a series of ``seed'' values from the initial
@var{seed}:

@example
@var{seed}
(@var{g} @var{seed})
(@var{g2} @var{seed})
(@var{g3} @var{seed})
...
@end example

@var{p} tells us when to stop: when it returns true when applied to one
of these seed values.

@var{f} maps each seed value to a character.  These characters are added
to the base character set @var{base-cs} to form the result;
@var{base-cs} defaults to the empty set.

@func{char-set-unfold!} adds the characters to @var{base-cs} in a
linear--update; it is allowed, but not required, to side--effect and use
@var{base-cs}'s storage to construct the result.

More precisely, the following definitions hold, ignoring the
optional-argument issues:

@example
(define (char-set-unfold p f g seed base-cs)
  (char-set-unfold! p f g seed (char-set-copy base-cs)))

(define (char-set-unfold! p f g seed base-cs)
  (let lp ((seed seed)
           (cs   base-cs))
    (if (p seed)
        cs
      (lp (g seed)
          (char-set-adjoin! cs (f seed))))))
@end example

@noindent
note that the actual implementation may be more efficient.

Examples:

@example
(port->char-set p)
@equiv{} (char-set-unfold eof-object? values
                          (lambda (x) (read-char p))
                          (read-char p))

(list->char-set lis)
@equiv{} (char-set-unfold null? car cdr lis)
@end example
@end defun


@defun char-set-for-each @var{proc} @var{cs}
Apply the procedure @var{proc} to each character in the character set
@var{cs}; return unspecified values.  The order in which @var{proc} is
applied to the characters in the set is unspecified, and may even change
from one procedure application to another.
@end defun


@defun char-set-map @var{proc} @var{cs}
@var{proc} is a character--to--character procedure; apply it to all the
characters in @var{cs}, and collect the results into a new character
set, return such new character set.

Example:

@example
(char-set-map char-downcase cs)
@end example
@end defun

@c page
@node srfi char-sets spec create
@subsubsection Creating character sets


@defun char-set-copy @var{cs}
Return a copy of the character set @var{cs}; ``copy'' means that if
either the input argument or the result value of this procedure is
passed to one of the linear--update procedures described below, the
other character set is guaranteed not to be altered.
@end defun


@defun char-set @var{char} ...
Return a character set containing the given characters.
@end defun


@defun list->char-set @var{char-list}
@defunx list->char-set @var{char-list} @var{base-cs}
@defunx list->char-set! @var{char-list} @var{base-cs}
Return a character set containing the characters in the list of
characters @var{char-list}.

If the character set @var{base-cs} is provided, the characters from
@var{char-list} are added to it.  @func{list->char-set!} is allowed, but
not required, to side--effect and reuse the storage in @var{base-cs};
@func{list->char-set} produces a fresh character set.
@end defun


@defun string->char-set @var{s}
@defunx string->char-set @var{s} @var{base-cs}
@defunx string->char-set! @var{s} @var{base-cs}
Return a character set containing the characters in the string @var{s}.

If the character set @var{base-cs} is provided, the characters from
@var{s} are added to it.  @func{string->char-set!} is allowed, but not
required, to side--effect and reuse the storage in @var{base-cs};
@func{string->char-set} produces a fresh character set.
@end defun


@defun char-set-filter @var{pred} @var{cs}
@defunx char-set-filter @var{pred} @var{cs} @var{base-cs}
@defunx char-set-filter! @var{pred} @var{cs} @var{base-cs}
Return a character set containing every character @var{c} in @var{cs}
such that @code{(@var{pred} @var{c})} returns true.

If the character set @var{base-cs} is provided: the characters specified
by @var{pred} are added to it.  @func{char-set-filter!} is allowed, but
not required, to side--effect and reuse the storage in @var{base-cs};
@func{char-set-filter} produces a fresh character set.

@quotation
An implementation may not save away a reference to @var{pred} and invoke
it after @func{char-set-filter} or @func{char-set-filter!} returns; that
is, ``lazy,'' on--demand implementations are not allowed, as pred may
have external dependencies on mutable data or have other side--effects.
@end quotation
@end defun


@defun ucs-range->char-set @var{lower} @var{upper}
@defunx ucs-range->char-set @var{lower} @var{upper} @var{error?}
@defunx ucs-range->char-set @var{lower} @var{upper} @var{error?} @var{base-cs}
@defunx ucs-range->char-set! @var{lower} @var{upper} @var{error?} @var{base-cs}
Lower and upper are exact non--negative integers such that
@code{@var{lower} <= @var{upper}}.

Return a character set containing every character whose ISO/IEC 10646
UCS-4 code lies in the half-open range @code{[@var{lower}, @var{upper})}.

If the requested range includes unassigned UCS values, these are
silently ignored (the current UCS specification has ``holes'' in the
space of assigned codes).

If the requested range includes ``private'' or ``user space'' codes,
these are handled in an implementation--specific manner; however, a UCS-
or Unicode-based Scheme implementation should pass them through
transparently.

If any code from the requested range specifies a valid, assigned UCS
character that has no corresponding representative in the
implementation's character type, then (1) an error is raised if
@var{error?}  is true, and (2) the code is ignored if @var{error?} is
false (the default).

If character set @var{base-cs} is provided, the characters specified by
the range are added to it.  @func{ucs-range->char-set!} is allowed, but
not required, to side--effect and reuse the storage in @var{base-cs};
@func{ucs-range->char-set} produces a fresh character set.
@end defun


@defun ->char-set @var{x}
Coerces @var{x} into a @code{char-set}.  @var{x} may be a string,
character or @code{char-set}.  A string is converted to the set of its
constituent characters; a character is converted to a singleton set; a
@code{char-set} is returned as--is.  This procedure is intended for use
by other procedures that want to provide user--friendly, wide--spectrum
interfaces to their clients.
@end defun

@c page
@node srfi char-sets spec query
@subsubsection Querying character sets


@defun char-set-size @var{cs}
Return the number of elements in character set @var{cs}.
@end defun


@defun char-set-count @var{pred} @var{cs}
Apply @var{pred} to the chars of character set @var{cs}, and return the
number of chars that caused the predicate to return true.
@end defun


@defun char-set->list @var{cs}
Return a list of the members of character set @var{cs}.  The order in
which the characters appear in the list is not defined, and may be
different from one call to another.
@end defun


@defun char-set->string @var{cs}
Return a string containing the members of character set @var{cs}.  The
order in which the characters appear in the string is not defined, and
may be different from one call to another.
@end defun


@defun char-set-contains? @var{cs} @var{char}
Test @var{char} for membership in character set @var{cs}.  Return a
boolean.
@end defun


@defun char-set-every @var{pred} @var{cs}
@defunx char-set-any @var{pred} @var{cs}
@func{char-set-every} procedure returns true if predicate @var{pred}
returns true of every character in the @var{cs}.

@func{char-set-any} applies @var{pred} to every character in @var{cs},
and returns the first true value it finds; if no character produces a
true value, it returns @false{}.

The order in which these procedures sequence through the elements of
@var{cs} is not specified.

Note that if we need to determine the actual character on which a
predicate returns true: we use @func{char-set-any} and arrange for the
predicate to return the character parameter as its true value:

@example
(char-set-any (lambda (c)
                (and (char-upper-case? c) c))
              cs)
@end example
@end defun

@c page
@node srfi char-sets spec algebra
@subsubsection Character set algebra


@defun char-set-adjoin @var{cs} @var{char} ...
@defunx char-set-delete @var{cs} @var{char} ...
Add/delete the @var{char} characters to/from character set @var{cs}.
@end defun


@defun char-set-adjoin! @var{cs} @var{char} ...
@defunx char-set-delete! @var{cs} @var{char} ...
Linear--update variants.  These procedures are allowed, but not
required, to side--effect their first parameter.
@end defun


@defun char-set-complement @var{cs}
@defunx char-set-union @var{cs} ...
@defunx char-set-intersection @var{cs} ...
@defunx char-set-difference @varo{cs} @var{cs} ...
@defunx char-set-xor @var{cs} ...
@defunx char-set-diff+intersection @varo{cs} @var{cs} ...
These procedures implement set complement, union, intersection,
difference, and exclusive OR for character sets.  The union,
intersection and xor operations are n--ary.  The difference function is
also n--ary, associates to the left (that is, it computes the difference
between its first argument and the union of all the other arguments),
and requires at least one argument.

Boundary cases:

@example
(char-set-union)                @result{} char-set:empty
(char-set-intersection)         @result{} char-set:full
(char-set-xor)                  @result{} char-set:empty
(char-set-difference cs)        @result{} cs
@end example

@func{char-set-diff+intersection} returns two values: the difference and
the intersection of the arguments; it partitions its first argument.  It
is equivalent to

@example
(values (char-set-difference cs1 cs2 ...)
        (char-set-intersection cs1 (char-set-union cs2 ...)))
@end example

@noindent
but can be implemented more efficiently.
@end defun


@defun char-set-complement! @var{cs}
@defunx char-set-union! @varo{cs} @var{cs} ...
@defunx char-set-intersection! @varo{cs} @var{cs} ...
@defunx char-set-difference! @varo{cs} @var{cs} ...
@defunx char-set-xor! @varo{cs} @var{cs} ...
@defunx char-set-diff+intersection! @varo{cs} @vari{cs} @var{cs} ...
These are linear--update variants of the set--algebra functions.  They
are allowed, but not required, to side--effect their first (required)
argument.

@func{char-set-diff+intersection!} is allowed to side--effect both of
its two required arguments.
@end defun

@c page
@node srfi char-sets spec std
@subsubsection Standard character sets


Several character sets are predefined for convenience:

@table @code
@item char-set:lower-case
Lower--case letters.

@item char-set:upper-case
Upper--case letters.

@item char-set:title-case
Title--case letters.

@item char-set:letter
Letters.

@item char-set:digit
Digits.

@item char-set:letter+digit
Letters and digits.

@item char-set:graphic
Printing characters except spaces.

@item char-set:printing
Printing characters including spaces.

@item char-set:whitespace
Whitespace characters.

@item char-set:iso-control
The @iso{} control characters.

@item char-set:punctuation
Punctuation characters.

@item char-set:symbol
Symbol characters.

@item char-set:hex-digit
A hexadecimal digit: 0-9, A-F, a-f.

@item char-set:blank
Blank characters, horizontal whitespace.

@item char-set:ascii
All characters in the @ascii{} set.

@item char-set:empty
Empty set.

@item char-set:full
All characters.
@end table

Note that there may be characters in @code{char-set:letter} that are
neither upper or lower case.  A ``graphic character'' is one that would
put ink on your page.

@ignore
While the exact composition of these sets may vary depending upon the
character type provided by the underlying Scheme system, here are the
definitions for some of the sets in an ASCII implementation:

@example
char-set:lower-case     a-z
char-set:upper-case     A-Z
char-set:letter         A-Z and a-z
char-set:digit  0123456789
char-set:punctuation    !"#%&'()*,-./:;?@@[\]_@{@}
char-set:symbol         $+<=>^`|~
char-set:whitespace     Space, newline, tab, form feed,
        vertical tab, carriage return
char-set:blank  Space and tab
char-set:graphic        letter + digit + punctuation + symbol
char-set:printing       graphic + whitespace
char-set:iso-control    ASCII 0-31 and 127
@end example
@end ignore

@c page
@node srfi char-sets ack
@subsection Acknowledgements


The design of this library benefited greatly from the feedback provided
during the @srfi{} discussion phase.  Among those contributing
thoughtful commentary and suggestions, both on the mailing list and by
private discussion, were Paolo Amoroso, Lars Arvestad, Alan Bawden, Jim
Bender, Dan Bornstein, Per Bothner, Will Clinger, Brian Denheyer, Kent
Dybvig, Sergei Egorov, Marc Feeley, Matthias Felleisen, Will Fitzgerald,
Matthew Flatt, Arthur A. Gleckler, Ben Goetter, Sven Hartrumpf, Erik
Hilsdale, Shiro Kawai, Richard Kelsey, Oleg Kiselyov, Bengt Kleberg,
Donovan Kolbly, Bruce Korb, Shriram Krishnamurthi, Bruce Lewis, Tom
Lord, Brad Lucier, Dave Mason, David Rush, Klaus Schilling, Jonathan
Sobel, Mike Sperber, Mikael Staldal, Vladimir Tsyshevsky, Donald Welsh,
and Mike Wilson.  I am grateful to them for their assistance.

I am also grateful the authors, implementors and documentors of all the
systems mentioned in the introduction.  Aubrey Jaffer should be noted
for his work in producing Web--accessible versions of the @rnrs{5} spec,
which was a tremendous aid.

This is not to imply that these individuals necessarily endorse the
final results, of course.

During this document's long development period, great patience was
exhibited by Mike Sperber, who is the editor for the @srfi{}, and by
Hillary Sullivan, who is not.

@c page
@node srfi char-sets license
@subsection Copyright


Certain portions of this document (the specific, marked segments of text
describing the @rnrs{5} procedures) were adapted with permission from
the @rnrs{5} report.

All other text is copyright @copyright{} Olin Shivers (1998, 1999,
2000).  All Rights Reserved.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

@c end of file
