@node srfi
@chapter Scheme Requests For Implementation


A port to @rnrs{6} of the @srfi{} libraries is included in the
distribution of @value{PRJNAME}.  The libraries' names conform to
@srfi{} 97: @srfi{} Libraries.  There is a registry of available
@srfi{}s and other platform features which works alongside @srfi{} 0:
Feature--Based Conditional Expansion.

@quotation
This @srfi{} documentation is an unofficial Texinfo reformatting and
minor modification of the original documents by Marco Maggi.
@end quotation

@menu
* srfi cond-expand::            @ansrfi{0} feature based conditional
                                expansion construct.
* srfi list::                   @ansrfi{1} list library.
* srfi and-let-star::           @ansrfi{2} @func{and-let*}.
* srfi string-ports::           @ansrfi{6} basic string ports.
* srfi receive::                @ansrfi{8} @func{receive}: Binding to
                                multiple values.
* srfi records::                @ansrfi{9} defining record types.
* srfi let-values::             @ansrfi{11} syntax for receiving
                                multiple values.
* srfi strings::                @ansrfi{13} string library.
* srfi char-sets::              @ansrfi{14} character sets.
* srfi case-lambda::            @ansrfi{16} syntax for procedures of
                                variable arity.
* srfi time::                   @ansrfi{19} time data types and procedures.
* srfi error-reporting::        @ansrfi{23} error reporting mechanism.
* srfi marray::                 @ansrfi{25} multidimensional array.
* srfi shared structures::      @ansrfi{38} representation for data with
                                shared structure.
* srfi specialize-procedures::  @ansrfi{26} notation for specializing
                                parameters without currying.
* srfi random::                 @ansrfi{27} sources of random bits.
* srfi basic-format::           @ansrfi{28} basic format strings.
* srfi rec::                    @ansrfi{31} a special form @func{rec}
                                for recursive evaluation.
* srfi parameters::             @ansrfi{39} parameter objects.
* srfi args-fold::              @ansrfi{37} a program argument processor.
* srfi streams::                @ansrfi{41} streams.
* srfi eager-comp::             @ansrfi{42} eager comprehensions.
* srfi vectors::                @ansrfi{43} vector library.
* srfi lazy::                   @ansrfi{45} lazy iterative algorithms.
* srfi intermediate-format::    @ansrfi{48} intermediate format strings.
* srfi general-cond::           @ansrfi{61} a more general @func{cond} clause.
* srfi testing::                @ansrfi{64} testing.
* srfi compare-procedures::     @ansrfi{67} compare procedures.
* srfi hash-tables::            @ansrfi{69} basic hash tables.
* srfi lightweight-testing::    @ansrfi{78} lightweight testing.
* srfi environment-variables::  @ansrfi{98} environment variables.
* srfi err5rs records::         @ansrfi{99} @acronym{ERR5RS} records.
@end menu

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@include srfi-cond-expand.texi
@include srfi-list.texi
@include srfi-and-let-star.texi
@include srfi-string-ports.texi
@include srfi-receive.texi
@include srfi-records.texi
@include srfi-let-values.texi
@include srfi-strings.texi
@include srfi-char-sets.texi
@include srfi-case-lambda.texi
@include srfi-time.texi
@include srfi-error-reporting.texi
@include srfi-multidimensional-array.texi
@include srfi-shared-structures.texi
@include srfi-specialize-procedures.texi
@include srfi-random.texi
@include srfi-basic-format.texi
@include srfi-rec.texi
@include srfi-parameters.texi
@include srfi-args-fold.texi
@include srfi-streams.texi
@include srfi-eager-comp.texi
@include srfi-vectors.texi
@include srfi-lazy.texi
@include srfi-intermediate-format.texi
@include srfi-general-cond.texi
@include srfi-testing.texi
@include srfi-compare-procedures.texi
@include srfi-hash-tables.texi
@include srfi-lightweight-testing.texi
@include srfi-environment-variables.texi
@include srfi-err5rs-records.texi

@c end of file
