@node unicode
@appendix On Unicode and @utf{} encodings


As required by @rnrs{6}, the Scheme implementations must support Unicode
characters and input/output libraries must implement transcoders for
textual ports supporting encoding and decoding between Scheme characters
and @utf{}-8 and @utf{}-16.

The mandatory starting points to learn about this stuff are the
following (@aurl{}s last verified on Sep 9, 2011):

@center @url{http://www.unicode.org/faq/utf_bom.html}
@center @url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universal_Character_Set}
@center @url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unicode}
@center @url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Byte_order_mark}
@center @url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UTF-8}
@center @url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UTF-16}
@center @url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UTF-32}

@noindent
here we give only a brief overview of the main definitions, drawing text
from those pages.

The @dfn{Universal Character Set} (@acronym{UCS}) is a standard set of
characters upon which many character encodings are based; it contains
abstract characters, each identified by an unambiguous name and an
integer number called its ``code point''.

@dfn{Unicode} is a computing industry standard for the consistent
encoding, representation and handling of text expressed in most of the
world's writing systems.

@acronym{UCS} and Unicode have an identical repertoire and numbers: the
same characters with the same numbers exist in both standards.
@acronym{UCS} is a simple character map, Unicode adds rules for
collation, normalization of forms, and the bidirectional algorithm for
scripts.

The Unicode Consortium, the nonprofit organization that coordinates
Unicode's development, has the goal of eventually replacing existing
character encoding schemes with Unicode and its standard ``Unicode
Transformation Format'' alias ``@acronym{UCS} Transformation Format''
(@utf{}) schemes.

By convention a Unicode code point is referred to by writing @code{U+}
followed by its hexadecimal number with at least @math{4} digits
(@code{U+0044} is fine, @code{U+12} is not).

In practice, Unicode code points are exact integers in the range
@math{[0, @pounds{}x10FFFF]}, but outside the range
@math{[@pounds{}xD800, @pounds{}xDFFF]} which has special meaning in
@utf{} schemes.  A code point can be stored in @math{21} bits:

@example
(string-length (number->string #x10FFFF 2)) @result{} 21
@end example

@noindent
@rnrs{6} defines fixnums to have at least @math{24} bits, so a fixnum is
wide enough to hold a code point:

@example
(fixnum? #x10FFFF) @result{} #t
@end example

@noindent
and indeed Scheme characters are a disjoint type of value holding such
fixnums:

@example
(integer->char #x10FFFF) @result{} #\x10FFFF
@end example

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @utf{}-8 scheme

@utf{}-8 is a multioctet character encoding for Unicode which can
represent every character in the Unicode set, that is it can represent
every code point in the ranges @code{[0, #xD800)} and @code{(#xDFFF,
#x10FFFF]}.

A stream of @utf{}-8 encoded characters is meant to be stored octet by
octet in fixed order (and so without the need to specify the endianness
of words).

The encoding scheme uses sequences of @math{1}, @math{2}, @math{3} or
@math{4} octets to encode a each code point as shown in the following
table; the first octet in a sequence has a unique bit pattern in the
most significant bits and so it allows the determination of the sequence
length; every octet contains a number of payload bits which must be
concatenated (bitwise inclusive OR) to reconstruct the integer
representation of a code point:

@example
| # of octets | 1st octet | 2nd octet | 3rd octet | 4th octet |
|-------------+-----------+-----------+-----------+-----------|
|     1        #b0xxxxxxx
|     2        #b110xxxxx  #b10xxxxxx
|     3        #b1110xxxx  #b10xxxxxx  #b10xxxxxx
|     4        #b11110xxx  #b10xxxxxx  #b10xxxxxx  #b10xxxxxx

| # of octets | # of payload bits |       hex range     |
|-------------+-------------------+---------------------|
|     1                         7    [#x0000,   #x007F]
|     2                5 + 6 = 11    [#x0080,   #x07FF]
|     3            4 + 6 + 6 = 16    [#x0800,   #xFFFF]
|     4        3 + 6 + 6 + 6 = 21  [#x010000, #x10FFFF]
@end example

Note that octets @code{#xFE} and @code{#xFF} cannot appear in a valid
stream of @utf{}-8 encoded characters.  The sequence of @math{3} octets
is the one that could encode (but must not) the forbidden range
@code{[#xD800, #xDFFF]}.

The first @math{128} characters of the Unicode character set correspond
one--to--one with @ascii{} and are encoded using a single octet with the
same binary value as the corresponding @ascii{} character, making valid
@ascii{} text valid @utf{}-8 encoded Unicode text as well.  Such encoded
octets have the Most Significant Bit (@acronym{MSB}) set to zero.

Although the standard does not define it, many programs start a @utf{}-8
stream with a Byte Order Mark (@acronym{BOM}) composed of the @math{3}
octets: @code{#xEF}, @code{#xBB}, @code{#xBF}.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading @utf{}-16 decoding

Given a 16-bit word in a @utf{}-16 stream, represented in Scheme as a
fixnum in the range @code{[#x0000, #xFFFF]}, we can classify it on the
following axis:

@example
0000        D7FF D800    DBFF DC00      DFFF E000       FFFF
 |-------------||-----------||-------------||------------|
  single word    first in     second in      single word
  character      pair         pair           character
@end example

@noindent
or the following logic:

@example
word in [#x0000, #xD7FF] => single word character
word in [#xD800, #xDBFF] => first in surrogate pair
word in [#xDC00, #xDFFF] => second in surrogate pair
word in [#xE000, #xFFFF] => single word character
@end example

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@iso{}/@acronym{IEC} 8859-1 also known as Latin-1

Latin-1 uses @math{1} octet per character.  The first @math{256} Unicode
code points are identical to the content of Latin-1, the first
@math{127} Latin-1 code points are identical to @ascii{}.  For an
itroduction see:

@center @url{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO/IEC_8859-1}

Latin-1 code points are identical to their octet encoding.

Latin-1 code points in the range @math{[0, 127]} are identical to the
same code points encoded in both @ascii{} and in @utf{}-8.

Latin-1 code points in the range @math{[128, 255]} are
@strong{different} from the same code points encoded in @utf{}-8.

Every octet (that is: every fixnum in the range @math{[0, 255]}) can be
interpreted as a character in Latin-1 encoding.

@c end of file
