.\" Copyright (C), 2014  Marco Maggi
.\" You may distribute this file under the terms of the GNU Free
.\" Documentation License.
.TH vicare 1 2014-02-12
.SH NAME
vicare \- A compiler for R6RS Scheme
.SH SYNOPSIS
.sp
.nf
\fBvicare\fR \fI[<vicare opts>]\fR \fB\-\-r6rs-script\fR \fI<script> [\-\- [<program opts]]\fR
\fBvicare\fR \fI[<vicare opts>]\fR \fB\-\-compile\-dependencies\fR \fI<script>\fR
.fi
.sp
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
Vicare Scheme is an R6RS compliant implementation of the programming
language Scheme, aiming to become a native compiler producing single
threaded programs running on Intel x86 32-bit and 64-bit processors; it
is tested only on GNU+Linux, no official support for other platforms is
present, but it should run on Mac OS X.

.\" ------------------------------------------------------------

.SH SOME RUNNING MODE OPTIONS
.PP
\fB\-\-r6rs\-script\fR \fIscript\fR
.RS 4
Start \fIVicare\fR in R6RS\-script mode.  Load the \fIscript\fR as an
R6RS top\-level program and execute it.
.RE

.PP
\fB\-\-compile\-dependencies\fR \fIscript\fR
.RS 4
Load the \fIscript\fR as an R6RS top\-level program, load all the
imported libraries, compile them and write them as FASL files to the
FASL repository.
.RE

.PP
\fB\-\-license\fR
.RS 4
Display the license message then exit.
.RE

.PP
\fB\-\-version\fR
.RS 4
Display version informations then exit.
.RE

.\" ------------------------------------------------------------

.SH SOME CONFIGURATION OPTIONS
.PP
\fB\-L\fR \fIdirectory\fR,
\fB\-\-search\-path\fR \fIdirectory\fR
.RS 4
Add \fIdirectory\fR to the search path for libraries and include files.
This option can be used multiple times.
.RE

.PP
\fB\-F\fR \fIdirectory\fR,
\fB\-\-fasl\-path\fR \fIdirectory\fR
.RS 4
Add \fIdirectory\fR to the search path for precompiled FASL files.  This
option can be used multiple times.
.RE

.PP
\fB\-\-fasl\-directory\fR \fIdirectory\fR
.RS 4
Select \fIdirectory\fR as top pathname under which FASL files are stored
when libraries are compiled; \fIdirectory\fR must exist.  When used
multiple times: the last one wins.  The selected directory is always
prepended to the FASL search path.
.RE

.PP
\fB\-\-more\-file\-extensions\fR
.RS 4
Rather than searching only libraries with extension \fB.vicare.sls\fR
and \fB.sls\fR, search also for \fB.vicare.ss\fR, \fB.ss\fR,
\fB.vicare.scm\fR, \fB.scm\fR and the \fBmain\fR file.
.RE

.PP
\fB\-\-\fR
.RS 4
Mark the end of \fBvicare\fR options and the beginning of user program
options; all the arguments after this marker can be obtained by calling
the \fBcommand-line\fR procedure.
.RE

.\" ------------------------------------------------------------

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PP
The official documentation is distributed in Texinfo format; see the
files \fBvicare-scheme\fR, \fBvicare-libs\fR, \fBnausicaa\fR,
\fBmehve\fR.
.PP
The latest version of this package can be downloaded from:
.PP
.RS 4
\%http://sourceforge.net/projects/vicare-scheme/files/
.RE
.PP
The home page of the Vicare project is at:
.PP
.RS 4
\%http://marcomaggi.github.com/vicare.html
.RE
.PP
Development takes place at:
.PP
.RS 4
\%http://github.com/marcomaggi/vicare/
.RE

.\" ------------------------------------------------------------

.SH BUGS
.PP
See the issues at the Github project page:
.PP
.RS 4
\%http://github.com/marcomaggi/vicare/issues
.RE

.\" ------------------------------------------------------------

.SH AUTHOR
Marco Maggi <marco.maggi-ipsu@poste.it>
.\" Local Variables:
.\" fill-column: 72
.\" default-justification: left
.\" End:
