NOW: 2008-06-29 22:19:10    -O0
running ack
running stats for compile-ack:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1719104 bytes allocated
running stats for ack (20):
    no collections
    1435 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1437 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1435 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ack:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1719104 bytes allocated
running stats for ack (20):
    no collections
    1435 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1436 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1435 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ack:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1719104 bytes allocated
running stats for ack (20):
    no collections
    1435 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1437 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1435 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ack:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1719104 bytes allocated
running stats for ack (20):
    no collections
    1435 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1436 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1435 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ack:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1719104 bytes allocated
running stats for ack (20):
    no collections
    1435 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1436 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1435 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running array1
running stats for compile-array1:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2037792 bytes allocated
running stats for array1 (2):
    80 collections
    1196 ms elapsed cpu time, including 225 ms collecting
    1197 ms elapsed real time, including 226 ms collecting
    1125 ms elapsed user time, including 154 ms collecting
    71 ms elapsed sys time, including 71 ms collecting
    320025984 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-array1:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2037792 bytes allocated
running stats for array1 (2):
    80 collections
    1194 ms elapsed cpu time, including 226 ms collecting
    1196 ms elapsed real time, including 226 ms collecting
    1122 ms elapsed user time, including 154 ms collecting
    72 ms elapsed sys time, including 72 ms collecting
    320025984 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-array1:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2037792 bytes allocated
running stats for array1 (2):
    80 collections
    1197 ms elapsed cpu time, including 226 ms collecting
    1197 ms elapsed real time, including 227 ms collecting
    1124 ms elapsed user time, including 154 ms collecting
    73 ms elapsed sys time, including 72 ms collecting
    320025984 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-array1:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2037792 bytes allocated
running stats for array1 (2):
    80 collections
    1196 ms elapsed cpu time, including 226 ms collecting
    1197 ms elapsed real time, including 226 ms collecting
    1124 ms elapsed user time, including 154 ms collecting
    72 ms elapsed sys time, including 72 ms collecting
    320025984 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-array1:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2037792 bytes allocated
running stats for array1 (2):
    80 collections
    1205 ms elapsed cpu time, including 229 ms collecting
    1205 ms elapsed real time, including 231 ms collecting
    1129 ms elapsed user time, including 154 ms collecting
    76 ms elapsed sys time, including 75 ms collecting
    320025984 bytes allocated
running bibfreq
running stats for compile-bibfreq:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2166592 bytes allocated
running stats for bibfreq (2):
    69 collections
    3042 ms elapsed cpu time, including 119 ms collecting
    3042 ms elapsed real time, including 119 ms collecting
    3018 ms elapsed user time, including 108 ms collecting
    24 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    287820048 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-bibfreq:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2166592 bytes allocated
running stats for bibfreq (2):
    69 collections
    3043 ms elapsed cpu time, including 119 ms collecting
    3043 ms elapsed real time, including 119 ms collecting
    3019 ms elapsed user time, including 108 ms collecting
    24 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    287820048 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-bibfreq:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2166592 bytes allocated
running stats for bibfreq (2):
    69 collections
    3042 ms elapsed cpu time, including 119 ms collecting
    3043 ms elapsed real time, including 119 ms collecting
    3018 ms elapsed user time, including 108 ms collecting
    24 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    287820048 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-bibfreq:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2166592 bytes allocated
running stats for bibfreq (2):
    69 collections
    3044 ms elapsed cpu time, including 117 ms collecting
    3044 ms elapsed real time, including 118 ms collecting
    3020 ms elapsed user time, including 107 ms collecting
    24 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    287820048 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-bibfreq:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2166592 bytes allocated
running stats for bibfreq (2):
    69 collections
    3038 ms elapsed cpu time, including 118 ms collecting
    3040 ms elapsed real time, including 118 ms collecting
    3015 ms elapsed user time, including 107 ms collecting
    23 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    287820048 bytes allocated
running boyer
running stats for compile-boyer:
    2 collections
    62 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    62 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4564800 bytes allocated
running stats for boyer (50):
    21 collections
    1778 ms elapsed cpu time, including 64 ms collecting
    1780 ms elapsed real time, including 65 ms collecting
    1770 ms elapsed user time, including 56 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    90597888 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-boyer:
    2 collections
    62 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    63 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4564800 bytes allocated
running stats for boyer (50):
    21 collections
    1779 ms elapsed cpu time, including 64 ms collecting
    1781 ms elapsed real time, including 65 ms collecting
    1771 ms elapsed user time, including 56 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    90597888 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-boyer:
    2 collections
    63 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    63 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    52 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    4564800 bytes allocated
running stats for boyer (50):
    21 collections
    1779 ms elapsed cpu time, including 64 ms collecting
    1781 ms elapsed real time, including 65 ms collecting
    1771 ms elapsed user time, including 56 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    90597888 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-boyer:
    2 collections
    62 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    63 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4564800 bytes allocated
running stats for boyer (50):
    21 collections
    1779 ms elapsed cpu time, including 64 ms collecting
    1781 ms elapsed real time, including 65 ms collecting
    1771 ms elapsed user time, including 56 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    90597888 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-boyer:
    2 collections
    62 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    63 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4564800 bytes allocated
running stats for boyer (50):
    21 collections
    1780 ms elapsed cpu time, including 64 ms collecting
    1781 ms elapsed real time, including 65 ms collecting
    1771 ms elapsed user time, including 56 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    90597888 bytes allocated
running browse
running stats for compile-browse:
    2 collections
    62 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    62 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4531000 bytes allocated
running stats for browse (600):
    110 collections
    1893 ms elapsed cpu time, including 65 ms collecting
    1895 ms elapsed real time, including 66 ms collecting
    1886 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    464172288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-browse:
    2 collections
    61 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    62 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4531000 bytes allocated
running stats for browse (600):
    110 collections
    1897 ms elapsed cpu time, including 65 ms collecting
    1899 ms elapsed real time, including 66 ms collecting
    1887 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    464172288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-browse:
    2 collections
    60 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    61 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4531000 bytes allocated
running stats for browse (600):
    110 collections
    1894 ms elapsed cpu time, including 65 ms collecting
    1895 ms elapsed real time, including 66 ms collecting
    1887 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    464172288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-browse:
    2 collections
    62 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    62 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4531000 bytes allocated
running stats for browse (600):
    110 collections
    1893 ms elapsed cpu time, including 65 ms collecting
    1895 ms elapsed real time, including 66 ms collecting
    1887 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    464172288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-browse:
    2 collections
    60 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    61 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4531000 bytes allocated
running stats for browse (600):
    110 collections
    1894 ms elapsed cpu time, including 65 ms collecting
    1895 ms elapsed real time, including 66 ms collecting
    1887 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    464172288 bytes allocated
running cat
running stats for compile-cat:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1731712 bytes allocated
running stats for cat (12):
    no collections
    1900 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    2705 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1681 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    219 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    398400 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-cat:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1731712 bytes allocated
running stats for cat (12):
    no collections
    1904 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    2346 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1683 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    221 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    398400 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-cat:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1731712 bytes allocated
running stats for cat (12):
    no collections
    1902 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    2343 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1682 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    220 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    398400 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-cat:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1731712 bytes allocated
running stats for cat (12):
    no collections
    1905 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    2364 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1685 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    220 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    398400 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-cat:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1731712 bytes allocated
running stats for cat (12):
    no collections
    1903 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    2344 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1682 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    221 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    398400 bytes allocated
running compiler
running stats for compile-compiler:
    42 collections
    2265 ms elapsed cpu time, including 746 ms collecting
    2265 ms elapsed real time, including 747 ms collecting
    2177 ms elapsed user time, including 664 ms collecting
    88 ms elapsed sys time, including 82 ms collecting
    173989320 bytes allocated
running stats for compiler (500):
    75 collections
    1746 ms elapsed cpu time, including 147 ms collecting
    1747 ms elapsed real time, including 148 ms collecting
    1714 ms elapsed user time, including 116 ms collecting
    32 ms elapsed sys time, including 31 ms collecting
    314392016 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-compiler:
    42 collections
    2264 ms elapsed cpu time, including 745 ms collecting
    2264 ms elapsed real time, including 746 ms collecting
    2176 ms elapsed user time, including 663 ms collecting
    88 ms elapsed sys time, including 82 ms collecting
    173989320 bytes allocated
running stats for compiler (500):
    75 collections
    1748 ms elapsed cpu time, including 147 ms collecting
    1751 ms elapsed real time, including 148 ms collecting
    1716 ms elapsed user time, including 116 ms collecting
    32 ms elapsed sys time, including 31 ms collecting
    314392016 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-compiler:
    42 collections
    2264 ms elapsed cpu time, including 745 ms collecting
    2265 ms elapsed real time, including 746 ms collecting
    2176 ms elapsed user time, including 663 ms collecting
    88 ms elapsed sys time, including 82 ms collecting
    173989320 bytes allocated
running stats for compiler (500):
    75 collections
    1753 ms elapsed cpu time, including 148 ms collecting
    1754 ms elapsed real time, including 149 ms collecting
    1717 ms elapsed user time, including 116 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed sys time, including 32 ms collecting
    314392016 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-compiler:
    42 collections
    2264 ms elapsed cpu time, including 746 ms collecting
    2266 ms elapsed real time, including 747 ms collecting
    2176 ms elapsed user time, including 663 ms collecting
    88 ms elapsed sys time, including 83 ms collecting
    173989320 bytes allocated
running stats for compiler (500):
    75 collections
    1749 ms elapsed cpu time, including 147 ms collecting
    1750 ms elapsed real time, including 148 ms collecting
    1717 ms elapsed user time, including 116 ms collecting
    32 ms elapsed sys time, including 31 ms collecting
    314392016 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-compiler:
    42 collections
    2264 ms elapsed cpu time, including 746 ms collecting
    2265 ms elapsed real time, including 747 ms collecting
    2176 ms elapsed user time, including 664 ms collecting
    88 ms elapsed sys time, including 82 ms collecting
    173989320 bytes allocated
running stats for compiler (500):
    75 collections
    1748 ms elapsed cpu time, including 147 ms collecting
    1750 ms elapsed real time, including 148 ms collecting
    1716 ms elapsed user time, including 116 ms collecting
    32 ms elapsed sys time, including 31 ms collecting
    314392016 bytes allocated
running conform
running stats for compile-conform:
    2 collections
    85 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    86 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    74 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8447712 bytes allocated
running stats for conform (70):
    31 collections
    1631 ms elapsed cpu time, including 53 ms collecting
    1633 ms elapsed real time, including 54 ms collecting
    1624 ms elapsed user time, including 47 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    128531168 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-conform:
    2 collections
    85 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    86 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    74 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8447712 bytes allocated
running stats for conform (70):
    31 collections
    1631 ms elapsed cpu time, including 53 ms collecting
    1632 ms elapsed real time, including 54 ms collecting
    1624 ms elapsed user time, including 47 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    128531168 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-conform:
    2 collections
    85 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    86 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    74 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8447712 bytes allocated
running stats for conform (70):
    31 collections
    1631 ms elapsed cpu time, including 53 ms collecting
    1632 ms elapsed real time, including 54 ms collecting
    1624 ms elapsed user time, including 47 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    128531168 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-conform:
    2 collections
    85 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    86 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    74 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8447712 bytes allocated
running stats for conform (70):
    31 collections
    1631 ms elapsed cpu time, including 53 ms collecting
    1632 ms elapsed real time, including 54 ms collecting
    1624 ms elapsed user time, including 47 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    128531168 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-conform:
    2 collections
    85 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    86 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    74 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8447712 bytes allocated
running stats for conform (70):
    31 collections
    1631 ms elapsed cpu time, including 53 ms collecting
    1632 ms elapsed real time, including 54 ms collecting
    1624 ms elapsed user time, including 47 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    128531168 bytes allocated
running cpstak
running stats for compile-cpstak:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1864400 bytes allocated
running stats for cpstak (1700):
    413 collections
    1893 ms elapsed cpu time, including 112 ms collecting
    1895 ms elapsed real time, including 114 ms collecting
    1885 ms elapsed user time, including 105 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1730153984 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-cpstak:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1864400 bytes allocated
running stats for cpstak (1700):
    413 collections
    1893 ms elapsed cpu time, including 112 ms collecting
    1895 ms elapsed real time, including 114 ms collecting
    1885 ms elapsed user time, including 105 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1730153984 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-cpstak:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1864400 bytes allocated
running stats for cpstak (1700):
    413 collections
    1894 ms elapsed cpu time, including 112 ms collecting
    1896 ms elapsed real time, including 114 ms collecting
    1886 ms elapsed user time, including 105 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1730153984 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-cpstak:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1864400 bytes allocated
running stats for cpstak (1700):
    413 collections
    1893 ms elapsed cpu time, including 112 ms collecting
    1895 ms elapsed real time, including 114 ms collecting
    1885 ms elapsed user time, including 105 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1730153984 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-cpstak:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1864400 bytes allocated
running stats for cpstak (1700):
    413 collections
    1894 ms elapsed cpu time, including 112 ms collecting
    1896 ms elapsed real time, including 114 ms collecting
    1886 ms elapsed user time, including 105 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1730153984 bytes allocated
running ctak
running stats for compile-ctak:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1934352 bytes allocated
running stats for ctak (160):
    165 collections
    1823 ms elapsed cpu time, including 270 ms collecting
    1825 ms elapsed real time, including 271 ms collecting
    1471 ms elapsed user time, including 118 ms collecting
    352 ms elapsed sys time, including 152 ms collecting
    692083568 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ctak:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1934352 bytes allocated
running stats for ctak (160):
    165 collections
    1822 ms elapsed cpu time, including 271 ms collecting
    1824 ms elapsed real time, including 272 ms collecting
    1470 ms elapsed user time, including 118 ms collecting
    352 ms elapsed sys time, including 153 ms collecting
    692083568 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ctak:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1934352 bytes allocated
running stats for ctak (160):
    165 collections
    1817 ms elapsed cpu time, including 267 ms collecting
    1818 ms elapsed real time, including 268 ms collecting
    1470 ms elapsed user time, including 117 ms collecting
    347 ms elapsed sys time, including 150 ms collecting
    692083568 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ctak:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1934352 bytes allocated
running stats for ctak (160):
    165 collections
    1820 ms elapsed cpu time, including 268 ms collecting
    1822 ms elapsed real time, including 270 ms collecting
    1471 ms elapsed user time, including 117 ms collecting
    349 ms elapsed sys time, including 151 ms collecting
    692083568 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ctak:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1934352 bytes allocated
running stats for ctak (160):
    165 collections
    1822 ms elapsed cpu time, including 271 ms collecting
    1823 ms elapsed real time, including 272 ms collecting
    1470 ms elapsed user time, including 118 ms collecting
    352 ms elapsed sys time, including 153 ms collecting
    692083568 bytes allocated
running dderiv
running stats for compile-dderiv:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2541872 bytes allocated
running stats for dderiv (3000000):
    281 collections
    1773 ms elapsed cpu time, including 98 ms collecting
    1774 ms elapsed real time, including 100 ms collecting
    1765 ms elapsed user time, including 92 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    1176016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-dderiv:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2541872 bytes allocated
running stats for dderiv (3000000):
    281 collections
    1772 ms elapsed cpu time, including 99 ms collecting
    1774 ms elapsed real time, including 100 ms collecting
    1764 ms elapsed user time, including 92 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1176016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-dderiv:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2541872 bytes allocated
running stats for dderiv (3000000):
    281 collections
    1774 ms elapsed cpu time, including 98 ms collecting
    1776 ms elapsed real time, including 100 ms collecting
    1767 ms elapsed user time, including 92 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    1176016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-dderiv:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2541872 bytes allocated
running stats for dderiv (3000000):
    281 collections
    1773 ms elapsed cpu time, including 99 ms collecting
    1775 ms elapsed real time, including 100 ms collecting
    1765 ms elapsed user time, including 92 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1176016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-dderiv:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2541872 bytes allocated
running stats for dderiv (3000000):
    281 collections
    1772 ms elapsed cpu time, including 97 ms collecting
    1773 ms elapsed real time, including 99 ms collecting
    1764 ms elapsed user time, including 91 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    1176016384 bytes allocated
running deriv
running stats for compile-deriv:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2087360 bytes allocated
running stats for deriv (4000000):
    375 collections
    1724 ms elapsed cpu time, including 109 ms collecting
    1725 ms elapsed real time, including 110 ms collecting
    1716 ms elapsed user time, including 102 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1568016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-deriv:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2087360 bytes allocated
running stats for deriv (4000000):
    375 collections
    1723 ms elapsed cpu time, including 109 ms collecting
    1724 ms elapsed real time, including 110 ms collecting
    1715 ms elapsed user time, including 102 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1568016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-deriv:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2087360 bytes allocated
running stats for deriv (4000000):
    375 collections
    1724 ms elapsed cpu time, including 108 ms collecting
    1725 ms elapsed real time, including 110 ms collecting
    1716 ms elapsed user time, including 101 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1568016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-deriv:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2087360 bytes allocated
running stats for deriv (4000000):
    375 collections
    1726 ms elapsed cpu time, including 108 ms collecting
    1727 ms elapsed real time, including 110 ms collecting
    1718 ms elapsed user time, including 101 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1568016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-deriv:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2087360 bytes allocated
running stats for deriv (4000000):
    375 collections
    1725 ms elapsed cpu time, including 108 ms collecting
    1726 ms elapsed real time, including 110 ms collecting
    1717 ms elapsed user time, including 101 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1568016384 bytes allocated
running destruc
running stats for compile-destruc:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2547280 bytes allocated
running stats for destruc (800):
    69 collections
    1764 ms elapsed cpu time, including 61 ms collecting
    1767 ms elapsed real time, including 62 ms collecting
    1753 ms elapsed user time, including 55 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    286909184 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-destruc:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2547280 bytes allocated
running stats for destruc (800):
    69 collections
    1758 ms elapsed cpu time, including 60 ms collecting
    1760 ms elapsed real time, including 62 ms collecting
    1752 ms elapsed user time, including 55 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    286909184 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-destruc:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2547280 bytes allocated
running stats for destruc (800):
    69 collections
    1758 ms elapsed cpu time, including 61 ms collecting
    1760 ms elapsed real time, including 62 ms collecting
    1752 ms elapsed user time, including 55 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    286909184 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-destruc:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2547280 bytes allocated
running stats for destruc (800):
    69 collections
    1758 ms elapsed cpu time, including 60 ms collecting
    1760 ms elapsed real time, including 62 ms collecting
    1752 ms elapsed user time, including 55 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    286909184 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-destruc:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2547280 bytes allocated
running stats for destruc (800):
    69 collections
    1758 ms elapsed cpu time, including 61 ms collecting
    1760 ms elapsed real time, including 62 ms collecting
    1752 ms elapsed user time, including 55 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    286909184 bytes allocated
running diviter
running stats for compile-diviter:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1834936 bytes allocated
running stats for diviter (1200000):
    229 collections
    1090 ms elapsed cpu time, including 77 ms collecting
    1090 ms elapsed real time, including 78 ms collecting
    1083 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    960016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-diviter:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1834936 bytes allocated
running stats for diviter (1200000):
    229 collections
    1090 ms elapsed cpu time, including 77 ms collecting
    1091 ms elapsed real time, including 78 ms collecting
    1083 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    960016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-diviter:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1834936 bytes allocated
running stats for diviter (1200000):
    229 collections
    1089 ms elapsed cpu time, including 77 ms collecting
    1089 ms elapsed real time, including 78 ms collecting
    1082 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    960016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-diviter:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1834936 bytes allocated
running stats for diviter (1200000):
    229 collections
    1089 ms elapsed cpu time, including 77 ms collecting
    1091 ms elapsed real time, including 78 ms collecting
    1082 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    960016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-diviter:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1834936 bytes allocated
running stats for diviter (1200000):
    229 collections
    1090 ms elapsed cpu time, including 77 ms collecting
    1090 ms elapsed real time, including 78 ms collecting
    1083 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    960016384 bytes allocated
running divrec
running stats for compile-divrec:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1818280 bytes allocated
running stats for divrec (1200000):
    229 collections
    1394 ms elapsed cpu time, including 77 ms collecting
    1395 ms elapsed real time, including 79 ms collecting
    1387 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    960016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-divrec:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1818280 bytes allocated
running stats for divrec (1200000):
    229 collections
    1393 ms elapsed cpu time, including 77 ms collecting
    1393 ms elapsed real time, including 78 ms collecting
    1386 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    960016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-divrec:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1818280 bytes allocated
running stats for divrec (1200000):
    229 collections
    1393 ms elapsed cpu time, including 77 ms collecting
    1393 ms elapsed real time, including 78 ms collecting
    1386 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    960016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-divrec:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1818280 bytes allocated
running stats for divrec (1200000):
    229 collections
    1394 ms elapsed cpu time, including 77 ms collecting
    1394 ms elapsed real time, including 78 ms collecting
    1387 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    960016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-divrec:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1818280 bytes allocated
running stats for divrec (1200000):
    229 collections
    1394 ms elapsed cpu time, including 77 ms collecting
    1395 ms elapsed real time, including 79 ms collecting
    1387 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    960016384 bytes allocated
running dynamic
running stats for compile-dynamic:
    7 collections
    306 ms elapsed cpu time, including 97 ms collecting
    306 ms elapsed real time, including 97 ms collecting
    285 ms elapsed user time, including 77 ms collecting
    21 ms elapsed sys time, including 20 ms collecting
    26375520 bytes allocated
running stats for dynamic (70):
    74 collections
    2060 ms elapsed cpu time, including 181 ms collecting
    2061 ms elapsed real time, including 181 ms collecting
    2038 ms elapsed user time, including 170 ms collecting
    22 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    310601168 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-dynamic:
    7 collections
    305 ms elapsed cpu time, including 97 ms collecting
    306 ms elapsed real time, including 98 ms collecting
    284 ms elapsed user time, including 77 ms collecting
    21 ms elapsed sys time, including 20 ms collecting
    26375520 bytes allocated
running stats for dynamic (70):
    74 collections
    2061 ms elapsed cpu time, including 180 ms collecting
    2061 ms elapsed real time, including 181 ms collecting
    2038 ms elapsed user time, including 169 ms collecting
    23 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    310601168 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-dynamic:
    7 collections
    305 ms elapsed cpu time, including 97 ms collecting
    305 ms elapsed real time, including 97 ms collecting
    284 ms elapsed user time, including 77 ms collecting
    21 ms elapsed sys time, including 20 ms collecting
    26375520 bytes allocated
running stats for dynamic (70):
    74 collections
    2061 ms elapsed cpu time, including 181 ms collecting
    2062 ms elapsed real time, including 181 ms collecting
    2038 ms elapsed user time, including 170 ms collecting
    23 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    310601168 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-dynamic:
    7 collections
    305 ms elapsed cpu time, including 97 ms collecting
    306 ms elapsed real time, including 98 ms collecting
    284 ms elapsed user time, including 77 ms collecting
    21 ms elapsed sys time, including 20 ms collecting
    26375520 bytes allocated
running stats for dynamic (70):
    74 collections
    2069 ms elapsed cpu time, including 183 ms collecting
    2071 ms elapsed real time, including 184 ms collecting
    2041 ms elapsed user time, including 171 ms collecting
    28 ms elapsed sys time, including 12 ms collecting
    310601168 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-dynamic:
    7 collections
    305 ms elapsed cpu time, including 97 ms collecting
    306 ms elapsed real time, including 97 ms collecting
    284 ms elapsed user time, including 77 ms collecting
    21 ms elapsed sys time, including 20 ms collecting
    26375520 bytes allocated
running stats for dynamic (70):
    74 collections
    2060 ms elapsed cpu time, including 181 ms collecting
    2060 ms elapsed real time, including 181 ms collecting
    2038 ms elapsed user time, including 170 ms collecting
    22 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    310601168 bytes allocated
running earley
running stats for compile-earley:
    3 collections
    102 ms elapsed cpu time, including 36 ms collecting
    102 ms elapsed real time, including 37 ms collecting
    91 ms elapsed user time, including 26 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    11163856 bytes allocated
running stats for earley (400):
    250 collections
    1833 ms elapsed cpu time, including 265 ms collecting
    1834 ms elapsed real time, including 267 ms collecting
    1821 ms elapsed user time, including 255 ms collecting
    12 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1047442688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-earley:
    3 collections
    102 ms elapsed cpu time, including 37 ms collecting
    102 ms elapsed real time, including 37 ms collecting
    91 ms elapsed user time, including 26 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    11163856 bytes allocated
running stats for earley (400):
    250 collections
    1833 ms elapsed cpu time, including 266 ms collecting
    1834 ms elapsed real time, including 268 ms collecting
    1821 ms elapsed user time, including 256 ms collecting
    12 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1047442688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-earley:
    3 collections
    102 ms elapsed cpu time, including 37 ms collecting
    102 ms elapsed real time, including 37 ms collecting
    91 ms elapsed user time, including 26 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    11163856 bytes allocated
running stats for earley (400):
    250 collections
    1832 ms elapsed cpu time, including 265 ms collecting
    1834 ms elapsed real time, including 266 ms collecting
    1820 ms elapsed user time, including 255 ms collecting
    12 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1047442688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-earley:
    3 collections
    102 ms elapsed cpu time, including 37 ms collecting
    102 ms elapsed real time, including 37 ms collecting
    91 ms elapsed user time, including 26 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    11163856 bytes allocated
running stats for earley (400):
    250 collections
    1835 ms elapsed cpu time, including 267 ms collecting
    1836 ms elapsed real time, including 269 ms collecting
    1823 ms elapsed user time, including 257 ms collecting
    12 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1047442688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-earley:
    3 collections
    102 ms elapsed cpu time, including 37 ms collecting
    102 ms elapsed real time, including 37 ms collecting
    91 ms elapsed user time, including 26 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    11163856 bytes allocated
running stats for earley (400):
    250 collections
    1833 ms elapsed cpu time, including 266 ms collecting
    1835 ms elapsed real time, including 268 ms collecting
    1821 ms elapsed user time, including 256 ms collecting
    12 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1047442688 bytes allocated
running fft
running stats for compile-fft:
    1 collection
    60 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    60 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3667200 bytes allocated
running stats for fft (4000):
    444 collections
    1660 ms elapsed cpu time, including 128 ms collecting
    1662 ms elapsed real time, including 130 ms collecting
    1651 ms elapsed user time, including 121 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1855760384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fft:
    1 collection
    59 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3667200 bytes allocated
running stats for fft (4000):
    444 collections
    1655 ms elapsed cpu time, including 127 ms collecting
    1656 ms elapsed real time, including 129 ms collecting
    1646 ms elapsed user time, including 120 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1855760384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fft:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3667200 bytes allocated
running stats for fft (4000):
    444 collections
    1654 ms elapsed cpu time, including 128 ms collecting
    1656 ms elapsed real time, including 130 ms collecting
    1645 ms elapsed user time, including 121 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1855760384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fft:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3667200 bytes allocated
running stats for fft (4000):
    444 collections
    1654 ms elapsed cpu time, including 128 ms collecting
    1655 ms elapsed real time, including 130 ms collecting
    1645 ms elapsed user time, including 121 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1855760384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fft:
    1 collection
    59 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    61 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3667200 bytes allocated
running stats for fft (4000):
    444 collections
    1661 ms elapsed cpu time, including 128 ms collecting
    1661 ms elapsed real time, including 130 ms collecting
    1652 ms elapsed user time, including 121 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1855760384 bytes allocated
running fib
running stats for compile-fib:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1677880 bytes allocated
running stats for fib (6):
    no collections
    1967 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1968 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1967 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fib:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1677880 bytes allocated
running stats for fib (6):
    no collections
    1968 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1968 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1968 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fib:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1677880 bytes allocated
running stats for fib (6):
    no collections
    1963 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1963 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1963 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fib:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1677880 bytes allocated
running stats for fib (6):
    no collections
    1968 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1969 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1967 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fib:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1677880 bytes allocated
running stats for fib (6):
    no collections
    1968 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1968 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1968 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running fibc
running stats for compile-fibc:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1908088 bytes allocated
running stats for fibc (900):
    115 collections
    1840 ms elapsed cpu time, including 241 ms collecting
    1841 ms elapsed real time, including 242 ms collecting
    1518 ms elapsed user time, including 103 ms collecting
    322 ms elapsed sys time, including 138 ms collecting
    481567360 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fibc:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1908088 bytes allocated
running stats for fibc (900):
    115 collections
    1847 ms elapsed cpu time, including 245 ms collecting
    1861 ms elapsed real time, including 252 ms collecting
    1519 ms elapsed user time, including 103 ms collecting
    328 ms elapsed sys time, including 142 ms collecting
    481567360 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fibc:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1908088 bytes allocated
running stats for fibc (900):
    115 collections
    1841 ms elapsed cpu time, including 242 ms collecting
    1842 ms elapsed real time, including 244 ms collecting
    1518 ms elapsed user time, including 103 ms collecting
    323 ms elapsed sys time, including 139 ms collecting
    481567360 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fibc:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1908088 bytes allocated
running stats for fibc (900):
    115 collections
    1843 ms elapsed cpu time, including 244 ms collecting
    1845 ms elapsed real time, including 245 ms collecting
    1518 ms elapsed user time, including 103 ms collecting
    325 ms elapsed sys time, including 141 ms collecting
    481567360 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fibc:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1908088 bytes allocated
running stats for fibc (900):
    115 collections
    1840 ms elapsed cpu time, including 243 ms collecting
    1842 ms elapsed real time, including 244 ms collecting
    1518 ms elapsed user time, including 104 ms collecting
    322 ms elapsed sys time, including 139 ms collecting
    481567360 bytes allocated
running fibfp
running stats for compile-fibfp:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1722488 bytes allocated
running stats for fibfp (2):
    342 collections
    1134 ms elapsed cpu time, including 104 ms collecting
    1134 ms elapsed real time, including 105 ms collecting
    1126 ms elapsed user time, including 97 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1433330080 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fibfp:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1722488 bytes allocated
running stats for fibfp (2):
    342 collections
    1134 ms elapsed cpu time, including 104 ms collecting
    1134 ms elapsed real time, including 105 ms collecting
    1126 ms elapsed user time, including 97 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1433330080 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fibfp:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1722488 bytes allocated
running stats for fibfp (2):
    342 collections
    1133 ms elapsed cpu time, including 104 ms collecting
    1133 ms elapsed real time, including 105 ms collecting
    1125 ms elapsed user time, including 97 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1433330080 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fibfp:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1722488 bytes allocated
running stats for fibfp (2):
    342 collections
    1132 ms elapsed cpu time, including 102 ms collecting
    1132 ms elapsed real time, including 104 ms collecting
    1124 ms elapsed user time, including 96 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    1433330080 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fibfp:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1722488 bytes allocated
running stats for fibfp (2):
    342 collections
    1132 ms elapsed cpu time, including 103 ms collecting
    1132 ms elapsed real time, including 105 ms collecting
    1124 ms elapsed user time, including 96 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1433330080 bytes allocated
running fpsum
running stats for compile-fpsum:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1685056 bytes allocated
running stats for fpsum (60):
    459 collections
    919 ms elapsed cpu time, including 115 ms collecting
    920 ms elapsed real time, including 117 ms collecting
    911 ms elapsed user time, including 108 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1920018304 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fpsum:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1685056 bytes allocated
running stats for fpsum (60):
    459 collections
    911 ms elapsed cpu time, including 115 ms collecting
    913 ms elapsed real time, including 117 ms collecting
    903 ms elapsed user time, including 108 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1920018304 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fpsum:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1685056 bytes allocated
running stats for fpsum (60):
    459 collections
    914 ms elapsed cpu time, including 115 ms collecting
    916 ms elapsed real time, including 117 ms collecting
    906 ms elapsed user time, including 108 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1920018304 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fpsum:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1685056 bytes allocated
running stats for fpsum (60):
    459 collections
    904 ms elapsed cpu time, including 115 ms collecting
    904 ms elapsed real time, including 117 ms collecting
    896 ms elapsed user time, including 108 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1920018304 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fpsum:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1685056 bytes allocated
running stats for fpsum (60):
    459 collections
    919 ms elapsed cpu time, including 115 ms collecting
    921 ms elapsed real time, including 117 ms collecting
    911 ms elapsed user time, including 108 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1920018304 bytes allocated
running gcbench
running stats for compile-gcbench:
    1 collection
    54 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    55 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3440992 bytes allocated
running stats for GCBench18 (2):
    182 collections
    2458 ms elapsed cpu time, including 644 ms collecting
    2468 ms elapsed real time, including 647 ms collecting
    2384 ms elapsed user time, including 576 ms collecting
    74 ms elapsed sys time, including 68 ms collecting
    757033424 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-gcbench:
    1 collection
    54 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    55 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3440992 bytes allocated
running stats for GCBench18 (2):
    182 collections
    2466 ms elapsed cpu time, including 645 ms collecting
    2486 ms elapsed real time, including 650 ms collecting
    2386 ms elapsed user time, including 577 ms collecting
    80 ms elapsed sys time, including 68 ms collecting
    757033424 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-gcbench:
    1 collection
    54 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    55 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3440992 bytes allocated
running stats for GCBench18 (2):
    182 collections
    2458 ms elapsed cpu time, including 644 ms collecting
    2469 ms elapsed real time, including 646 ms collecting
    2384 ms elapsed user time, including 576 ms collecting
    74 ms elapsed sys time, including 68 ms collecting
    757033424 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-gcbench:
    1 collection
    54 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    54 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3440992 bytes allocated
running stats for GCBench18 (2):
    182 collections
    2462 ms elapsed cpu time, including 647 ms collecting
    2483 ms elapsed real time, including 655 ms collecting
    2388 ms elapsed user time, including 579 ms collecting
    74 ms elapsed sys time, including 68 ms collecting
    757033424 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-gcbench:
    1 collection
    54 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    55 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3440992 bytes allocated
running stats for GCBench18 (2):
    182 collections
    2456 ms elapsed cpu time, including 641 ms collecting
    2467 ms elapsed real time, including 645 ms collecting
    2382 ms elapsed user time, including 573 ms collecting
    74 ms elapsed sys time, including 68 ms collecting
    757033424 bytes allocated
running graphs
running stats for compile-graphs:
    2 collections
    78 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    79 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    67 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    6580024 bytes allocated
running stats for graphs (500):
    285 collections
    1632 ms elapsed cpu time, including 124 ms collecting
    1634 ms elapsed real time, including 125 ms collecting
    1623 ms elapsed user time, including 116 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    1192800288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-graphs:
    2 collections
    78 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    79 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    67 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    6580024 bytes allocated
running stats for graphs (500):
    285 collections
    1632 ms elapsed cpu time, including 124 ms collecting
    1633 ms elapsed real time, including 125 ms collecting
    1623 ms elapsed user time, including 116 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    1192800288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-graphs:
    2 collections
    78 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    79 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    67 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    6580024 bytes allocated
running stats for graphs (500):
    285 collections
    1631 ms elapsed cpu time, including 124 ms collecting
    1632 ms elapsed real time, including 125 ms collecting
    1622 ms elapsed user time, including 116 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    1192800288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-graphs:
    2 collections
    78 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    79 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    67 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    6580024 bytes allocated
running stats for graphs (500):
    285 collections
    1634 ms elapsed cpu time, including 123 ms collecting
    1636 ms elapsed real time, including 125 ms collecting
    1625 ms elapsed user time, including 116 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1192800288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-graphs:
    2 collections
    78 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    78 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    67 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    6580024 bytes allocated
running stats for graphs (500):
    285 collections
    1631 ms elapsed cpu time, including 124 ms collecting
    1633 ms elapsed real time, including 125 ms collecting
    1622 ms elapsed user time, including 116 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    1192800288 bytes allocated
running lattice
running stats for compile-lattice:
    1 collection
    55 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    55 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3587240 bytes allocated
running stats for lattice (2):
    170 collections
    2542 ms elapsed cpu time, including 72 ms collecting
    2544 ms elapsed real time, including 73 ms collecting
    2535 ms elapsed user time, including 66 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    709273600 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-lattice:
    1 collection
    55 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    55 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3587240 bytes allocated
running stats for lattice (2):
    170 collections
    2542 ms elapsed cpu time, including 72 ms collecting
    2543 ms elapsed real time, including 73 ms collecting
    2535 ms elapsed user time, including 66 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    709273600 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-lattice:
    1 collection
    55 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    55 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3587240 bytes allocated
running stats for lattice (2):
    170 collections
    2541 ms elapsed cpu time, including 72 ms collecting
    2543 ms elapsed real time, including 73 ms collecting
    2534 ms elapsed user time, including 66 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    709273600 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-lattice:
    1 collection
    55 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    55 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3587240 bytes allocated
running stats for lattice (2):
    170 collections
    2543 ms elapsed cpu time, including 72 ms collecting
    2545 ms elapsed real time, including 73 ms collecting
    2536 ms elapsed user time, including 66 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    709273600 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-lattice:
    1 collection
    55 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    55 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3587240 bytes allocated
running stats for lattice (2):
    170 collections
    2545 ms elapsed cpu time, including 72 ms collecting
    2547 ms elapsed real time, including 73 ms collecting
    2536 ms elapsed user time, including 66 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    709273600 bytes allocated
running matrix
running stats for compile-matrix:
    2 collections
    86 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    87 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    75 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8531584 bytes allocated
running stats for matrix (600):
    196 collections
    1628 ms elapsed cpu time, including 78 ms collecting
    1628 ms elapsed real time, including 80 ms collecting
    1620 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    820087488 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-matrix:
    2 collections
    86 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    86 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    75 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8531584 bytes allocated
running stats for matrix (600):
    196 collections
    1625 ms elapsed cpu time, including 77 ms collecting
    1626 ms elapsed real time, including 77 ms collecting
    1617 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    820087488 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-matrix:
    2 collections
    85 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    86 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    74 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8531584 bytes allocated
running stats for matrix (600):
    196 collections
    1625 ms elapsed cpu time, including 77 ms collecting
    1626 ms elapsed real time, including 78 ms collecting
    1617 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    820087488 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-matrix:
    2 collections
    86 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    86 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    75 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8531584 bytes allocated
running stats for matrix (600):
    196 collections
    1624 ms elapsed cpu time, including 77 ms collecting
    1626 ms elapsed real time, including 78 ms collecting
    1616 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    820087488 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-matrix:
    2 collections
    86 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    86 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    75 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8531584 bytes allocated
running stats for matrix (600):
    196 collections
    1625 ms elapsed cpu time, including 77 ms collecting
    1626 ms elapsed real time, including 78 ms collecting
    1617 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    820087488 bytes allocated
running maze
running stats for compile-maze:
    3 collections
    88 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    89 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    77 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    9002472 bytes allocated
running stats for maze (4000):
    54 collections
    1568 ms elapsed cpu time, including 51 ms collecting
    1568 ms elapsed real time, including 51 ms collecting
    1560 ms elapsed user time, including 44 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    229388304 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-maze:
    3 collections
    88 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    89 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    77 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    9002472 bytes allocated
running stats for maze (4000):
    54 collections
    1567 ms elapsed cpu time, including 51 ms collecting
    1569 ms elapsed real time, including 51 ms collecting
    1559 ms elapsed user time, including 44 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    229388304 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-maze:
    3 collections
    88 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    89 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    77 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    9002472 bytes allocated
running stats for maze (4000):
    54 collections
    1572 ms elapsed cpu time, including 51 ms collecting
    1574 ms elapsed real time, including 51 ms collecting
    1564 ms elapsed user time, including 44 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    229388304 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-maze:
    3 collections
    88 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    89 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    77 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    9002472 bytes allocated
running stats for maze (4000):
    54 collections
    1568 ms elapsed cpu time, including 51 ms collecting
    1569 ms elapsed real time, including 52 ms collecting
    1560 ms elapsed user time, including 44 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    229388304 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-maze:
    3 collections
    88 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    89 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    77 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    9002472 bytes allocated
running stats for maze (4000):
    54 collections
    1568 ms elapsed cpu time, including 51 ms collecting
    1568 ms elapsed real time, including 51 ms collecting
    1560 ms elapsed user time, including 44 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    229388304 bytes allocated
running mazefun
running stats for compile-mazefun:
    1 collection
    57 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4130864 bytes allocated
running stats for mazefun (2500):
    90 collections
    2064 ms elapsed cpu time, including 62 ms collecting
    2065 ms elapsed real time, including 63 ms collecting
    2058 ms elapsed user time, including 56 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    376336384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-mazefun:
    1 collection
    57 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4130864 bytes allocated
running stats for mazefun (2500):
    90 collections
    2064 ms elapsed cpu time, including 62 ms collecting
    2065 ms elapsed real time, including 63 ms collecting
    2058 ms elapsed user time, including 56 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    376336384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-mazefun:
    1 collection
    57 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4130864 bytes allocated
running stats for mazefun (2500):
    90 collections
    2064 ms elapsed cpu time, including 63 ms collecting
    2065 ms elapsed real time, including 63 ms collecting
    2058 ms elapsed user time, including 57 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    376336384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-mazefun:
    1 collection
    57 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4130864 bytes allocated
running stats for mazefun (2500):
    90 collections
    2066 ms elapsed cpu time, including 63 ms collecting
    2066 ms elapsed real time, including 63 ms collecting
    2059 ms elapsed user time, including 57 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    376336384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-mazefun:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4130864 bytes allocated
running stats for mazefun (2500):
    90 collections
    2069 ms elapsed cpu time, including 63 ms collecting
    2073 ms elapsed real time, including 63 ms collecting
    2059 ms elapsed user time, including 57 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    376336384 bytes allocated
running mbrot
running stats for compile-mbrot:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2588936 bytes allocated
running stats for mbrot (120):
    637 collections
    1380 ms elapsed cpu time, including 168 ms collecting
    1381 ms elapsed real time, including 170 ms collecting
    1371 ms elapsed user time, including 160 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    2664329344 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-mbrot:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2588936 bytes allocated
running stats for mbrot (120):
    637 collections
    1377 ms elapsed cpu time, including 168 ms collecting
    1379 ms elapsed real time, including 170 ms collecting
    1367 ms elapsed user time, including 160 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    2664329344 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-mbrot:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2588936 bytes allocated
running stats for mbrot (120):
    637 collections
    1387 ms elapsed cpu time, including 168 ms collecting
    1387 ms elapsed real time, including 170 ms collecting
    1377 ms elapsed user time, including 160 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    2664329344 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-mbrot:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2588936 bytes allocated
running stats for mbrot (120):
    637 collections
    1372 ms elapsed cpu time, including 168 ms collecting
    1373 ms elapsed real time, including 170 ms collecting
    1362 ms elapsed user time, including 160 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    2664329344 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-mbrot:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2588936 bytes allocated
running stats for mbrot (120):
    637 collections
    1381 ms elapsed cpu time, including 168 ms collecting
    1382 ms elapsed real time, including 171 ms collecting
    1372 ms elapsed user time, including 160 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    2664329344 bytes allocated
running nbody
running stats for compile-nbody:
    5 collections
    207 ms elapsed cpu time, including 79 ms collecting
    208 ms elapsed real time, including 80 ms collecting
    186 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    21 ms elapsed sys time, including 20 ms collecting
    20897552 bytes allocated
Unhandled exception:
 Condition components:
   1. &assertion
   2. &who: fl+
   3. &message: "not a flonum"
   4. &irritants: (0)
ERROR: nbody failed
running stats for compile-nbody:
    5 collections
    206 ms elapsed cpu time, including 79 ms collecting
    207 ms elapsed real time, including 80 ms collecting
    186 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    20 ms elapsed sys time, including 20 ms collecting
    20897552 bytes allocated
Unhandled exception:
 Condition components:
   1. &assertion
   2. &who: fl+
   3. &message: "not a flonum"
   4. &irritants: (0)
ERROR: nbody failed
running stats for compile-nbody:
    5 collections
    206 ms elapsed cpu time, including 79 ms collecting
    207 ms elapsed real time, including 80 ms collecting
    186 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    20 ms elapsed sys time, including 20 ms collecting
    20897552 bytes allocated
Unhandled exception:
 Condition components:
   1. &assertion
   2. &who: fl+
   3. &message: "not a flonum"
   4. &irritants: (0)
ERROR: nbody failed
running stats for compile-nbody:
    5 collections
    206 ms elapsed cpu time, including 79 ms collecting
    207 ms elapsed real time, including 80 ms collecting
    186 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    20 ms elapsed sys time, including 20 ms collecting
    20897552 bytes allocated
Unhandled exception:
 Condition components:
   1. &assertion
   2. &who: fl+
   3. &message: "not a flonum"
   4. &irritants: (0)
ERROR: nbody failed
running stats for compile-nbody:
    5 collections
    207 ms elapsed cpu time, including 79 ms collecting
    207 ms elapsed real time, including 80 ms collecting
    187 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    20 ms elapsed sys time, including 20 ms collecting
    20897552 bytes allocated
Unhandled exception:
 Condition components:
   1. &assertion
   2. &who: fl+
   3. &message: "not a flonum"
   4. &irritants: (0)
ERROR: nbody failed
running nboyer
running stats for compile-nboyer:
    2 collections
    70 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    70 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5861240 bytes allocated
running stats for nboyer0 (150):
    73 collections
    1807 ms elapsed cpu time, including 145 ms collecting
    1809 ms elapsed real time, including 145 ms collecting
    1797 ms elapsed user time, including 135 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    305504688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nboyer:
    2 collections
    70 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    70 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5861240 bytes allocated
running stats for nboyer0 (150):
    73 collections
    1772 ms elapsed cpu time, including 145 ms collecting
    1774 ms elapsed real time, including 145 ms collecting
    1762 ms elapsed user time, including 135 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    305504688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nboyer:
    2 collections
    70 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    70 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5861240 bytes allocated
running stats for nboyer0 (150):
    73 collections
    1807 ms elapsed cpu time, including 145 ms collecting
    1809 ms elapsed real time, including 145 ms collecting
    1797 ms elapsed user time, including 135 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    305504688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nboyer:
    2 collections
    70 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    70 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5861240 bytes allocated
running stats for nboyer0 (150):
    73 collections
    1772 ms elapsed cpu time, including 145 ms collecting
    1774 ms elapsed real time, including 145 ms collecting
    1762 ms elapsed user time, including 135 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    305504688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nboyer:
    2 collections
    70 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    70 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5861240 bytes allocated
running stats for nboyer0 (150):
    73 collections
    1772 ms elapsed cpu time, including 145 ms collecting
    1774 ms elapsed real time, including 145 ms collecting
    1762 ms elapsed user time, including 135 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    305504688 bytes allocated
running nqueens
running stats for compile-nqueens:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2018584 bytes allocated
running stats for nqueens (4000):
    92 collections
    2078 ms elapsed cpu time, including 60 ms collecting
    2079 ms elapsed real time, including 61 ms collecting
    2072 ms elapsed user time, including 55 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    384784384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nqueens:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2018584 bytes allocated
running stats for nqueens (4000):
    92 collections
    2078 ms elapsed cpu time, including 60 ms collecting
    2080 ms elapsed real time, including 61 ms collecting
    2072 ms elapsed user time, including 55 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    384784384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nqueens:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2018584 bytes allocated
running stats for nqueens (4000):
    92 collections
    2078 ms elapsed cpu time, including 60 ms collecting
    2079 ms elapsed real time, including 61 ms collecting
    2072 ms elapsed user time, including 55 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    384784384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nqueens:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2018584 bytes allocated
running stats for nqueens (4000):
    92 collections
    2078 ms elapsed cpu time, including 60 ms collecting
    2079 ms elapsed real time, including 61 ms collecting
    2072 ms elapsed user time, including 55 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    384784384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nqueens:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2018584 bytes allocated
running stats for nqueens (4000):
    92 collections
    2086 ms elapsed cpu time, including 61 ms collecting
    2088 ms elapsed real time, including 62 ms collecting
    2073 ms elapsed user time, including 55 ms collecting
    13 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    384784384 bytes allocated
running ntakl
running stats for compile-ntakl:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1886464 bytes allocated
running stats for ntakl (600):
    no collections
    2285 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    2287 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    2285 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ntakl:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1886464 bytes allocated
running stats for ntakl (600):
    no collections
    2285 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    2286 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    2285 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ntakl:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1886464 bytes allocated
running stats for ntakl (600):
    no collections
    2285 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    2286 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    2285 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ntakl:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1886464 bytes allocated
running stats for ntakl (600):
    no collections
    2285 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    2286 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    2285 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ntakl:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1886464 bytes allocated
running stats for ntakl (600):
    no collections
    2285 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    2286 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    2285 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running nucleic
running stats for compile-nucleic:
    8 collections
    291 ms elapsed cpu time, including 90 ms collecting
    293 ms elapsed real time, including 90 ms collecting
    272 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 19 ms collecting
    32063992 bytes allocated
running stats for nucleic (12):
    267 collections
    1360 ms elapsed cpu time, including 98 ms collecting
    1361 ms elapsed real time, including 100 ms collecting
    1356 ms elapsed user time, including 95 ms collecting
    4 ms elapsed sys time, including 3 ms collecting
    1117218816 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nucleic:
    8 collections
    290 ms elapsed cpu time, including 88 ms collecting
    292 ms elapsed real time, including 89 ms collecting
    271 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 18 ms collecting
    32063992 bytes allocated
running stats for nucleic (12):
    267 collections
    1366 ms elapsed cpu time, including 98 ms collecting
    1367 ms elapsed real time, including 99 ms collecting
    1362 ms elapsed user time, including 95 ms collecting
    4 ms elapsed sys time, including 3 ms collecting
    1117218816 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nucleic:
    8 collections
    290 ms elapsed cpu time, including 88 ms collecting
    291 ms elapsed real time, including 89 ms collecting
    271 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 18 ms collecting
    32063992 bytes allocated
running stats for nucleic (12):
    267 collections
    1371 ms elapsed cpu time, including 98 ms collecting
    1373 ms elapsed real time, including 99 ms collecting
    1367 ms elapsed user time, including 95 ms collecting
    4 ms elapsed sys time, including 3 ms collecting
    1117218816 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nucleic:
    8 collections
    290 ms elapsed cpu time, including 88 ms collecting
    291 ms elapsed real time, including 89 ms collecting
    271 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 18 ms collecting
    32063992 bytes allocated
running stats for nucleic (12):
    267 collections
    1360 ms elapsed cpu time, including 98 ms collecting
    1361 ms elapsed real time, including 100 ms collecting
    1356 ms elapsed user time, including 95 ms collecting
    4 ms elapsed sys time, including 3 ms collecting
    1117218816 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nucleic:
    8 collections
    290 ms elapsed cpu time, including 88 ms collecting
    291 ms elapsed real time, including 89 ms collecting
    271 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 18 ms collecting
    32063992 bytes allocated
running stats for nucleic (12):
    267 collections
    1373 ms elapsed cpu time, including 98 ms collecting
    1374 ms elapsed real time, including 100 ms collecting
    1369 ms elapsed user time, including 95 ms collecting
    4 ms elapsed sys time, including 3 ms collecting
    1117218816 bytes allocated
running paraffins
running stats for compile-paraffins:
    1 collection
    57 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4152416 bytes allocated
running stats for paraffins (1800):
    354 collections
    1677 ms elapsed cpu time, including 593 ms collecting
    1679 ms elapsed real time, including 596 ms collecting
    1659 ms elapsed user time, including 577 ms collecting
    18 ms elapsed sys time, including 16 ms collecting
    1481632384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-paraffins:
    1 collection
    57 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4152416 bytes allocated
running stats for paraffins (1800):
    354 collections
    1677 ms elapsed cpu time, including 594 ms collecting
    1679 ms elapsed real time, including 596 ms collecting
    1659 ms elapsed user time, including 578 ms collecting
    18 ms elapsed sys time, including 16 ms collecting
    1481632384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-paraffins:
    1 collection
    57 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4152416 bytes allocated
running stats for paraffins (1800):
    354 collections
    1678 ms elapsed cpu time, including 593 ms collecting
    1680 ms elapsed real time, including 596 ms collecting
    1660 ms elapsed user time, including 577 ms collecting
    18 ms elapsed sys time, including 16 ms collecting
    1481632384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-paraffins:
    1 collection
    57 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4152416 bytes allocated
running stats for paraffins (1800):
    354 collections
    1676 ms elapsed cpu time, including 593 ms collecting
    1678 ms elapsed real time, including 595 ms collecting
    1658 ms elapsed user time, including 577 ms collecting
    18 ms elapsed sys time, including 16 ms collecting
    1481632384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-paraffins:
    1 collection
    57 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4152416 bytes allocated
running stats for paraffins (1800):
    354 collections
    1684 ms elapsed cpu time, including 596 ms collecting
    1686 ms elapsed real time, including 599 ms collecting
    1662 ms elapsed user time, including 578 ms collecting
    22 ms elapsed sys time, including 18 ms collecting
    1481632384 bytes allocated
running parsing
running stats for compile-parsing:
    3 collections
    116 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    117 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    105 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    10488568 bytes allocated
running stats for parsing:parsing-data.ss:360 (360):
    39 collections
    2141 ms elapsed cpu time, including 50 ms collecting
    2141 ms elapsed real time, including 50 ms collecting
    2131 ms elapsed user time, including 40 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    160082688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-parsing:
    3 collections
    117 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    117 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    106 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    10488568 bytes allocated
running stats for parsing:parsing-data.ss:360 (360):
    39 collections
    2141 ms elapsed cpu time, including 50 ms collecting
    2141 ms elapsed real time, including 50 ms collecting
    2130 ms elapsed user time, including 40 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    160082688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-parsing:
    3 collections
    117 ms elapsed cpu time, including 36 ms collecting
    117 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    106 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    10488568 bytes allocated
running stats for parsing:parsing-data.ss:360 (360):
    39 collections
    2140 ms elapsed cpu time, including 50 ms collecting
    2141 ms elapsed real time, including 50 ms collecting
    2130 ms elapsed user time, including 40 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    160082688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-parsing:
    3 collections
    117 ms elapsed cpu time, including 36 ms collecting
    117 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    106 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    10488568 bytes allocated
running stats for parsing:parsing-data.ss:360 (360):
    39 collections
    2140 ms elapsed cpu time, including 50 ms collecting
    2141 ms elapsed real time, including 50 ms collecting
    2130 ms elapsed user time, including 40 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    160082688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-parsing:
    3 collections
    117 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    117 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    106 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    10488568 bytes allocated
running stats for parsing:parsing-data.ss:360 (360):
    39 collections
    2140 ms elapsed cpu time, including 50 ms collecting
    2142 ms elapsed real time, including 50 ms collecting
    2130 ms elapsed user time, including 40 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    160082688 bytes allocated
running perm9
running stats for compile-perm9:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2494992 bytes allocated
running stats for perm9 (12):
    43 collections
    1707 ms elapsed cpu time, including 1287 ms collecting
    1708 ms elapsed real time, including 1288 ms collecting
    1429 ms elapsed user time, including 1009 ms collecting
    278 ms elapsed sys time, including 278 ms collecting
    179592448 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-perm9:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2494992 bytes allocated
running stats for perm9 (12):
    43 collections
    1707 ms elapsed cpu time, including 1286 ms collecting
    1707 ms elapsed real time, including 1288 ms collecting
    1427 ms elapsed user time, including 1007 ms collecting
    280 ms elapsed sys time, including 279 ms collecting
    179592448 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-perm9:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2494992 bytes allocated
running stats for perm9 (12):
    43 collections
    1709 ms elapsed cpu time, including 1288 ms collecting
    1709 ms elapsed real time, including 1289 ms collecting
    1431 ms elapsed user time, including 1011 ms collecting
    278 ms elapsed sys time, including 277 ms collecting
    179592448 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-perm9:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2494992 bytes allocated
running stats for perm9 (12):
    43 collections
    1708 ms elapsed cpu time, including 1289 ms collecting
    1709 ms elapsed real time, including 1289 ms collecting
    1429 ms elapsed user time, including 1010 ms collecting
    279 ms elapsed sys time, including 279 ms collecting
    179592448 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-perm9:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2494992 bytes allocated
running stats for perm9 (12):
    43 collections
    1706 ms elapsed cpu time, including 1286 ms collecting
    1707 ms elapsed real time, including 1287 ms collecting
    1427 ms elapsed user time, including 1008 ms collecting
    279 ms elapsed sys time, including 278 ms collecting
    179592448 bytes allocated
running peval
running stats for compile-peval:
    3 collections
    104 ms elapsed cpu time, including 36 ms collecting
    106 ms elapsed real time, including 37 ms collecting
    93 ms elapsed user time, including 26 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    11061888 bytes allocated
running stats for peval (400):
    70 collections
    1774 ms elapsed cpu time, including 67 ms collecting
    1774 ms elapsed real time, including 68 ms collecting
    1765 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    290635040 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-peval:
    3 collections
    105 ms elapsed cpu time, including 37 ms collecting
    106 ms elapsed real time, including 37 ms collecting
    94 ms elapsed user time, including 27 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    11061888 bytes allocated
running stats for peval (400):
    70 collections
    1774 ms elapsed cpu time, including 67 ms collecting
    1775 ms elapsed real time, including 67 ms collecting
    1765 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    290635040 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-peval:
    3 collections
    105 ms elapsed cpu time, including 37 ms collecting
    106 ms elapsed real time, including 37 ms collecting
    94 ms elapsed user time, including 27 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    11061888 bytes allocated
running stats for peval (400):
    70 collections
    1774 ms elapsed cpu time, including 67 ms collecting
    1775 ms elapsed real time, including 67 ms collecting
    1766 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    290635040 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-peval:
    3 collections
    105 ms elapsed cpu time, including 36 ms collecting
    106 ms elapsed real time, including 37 ms collecting
    94 ms elapsed user time, including 26 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    11061888 bytes allocated
running stats for peval (400):
    70 collections
    1776 ms elapsed cpu time, including 67 ms collecting
    1778 ms elapsed real time, including 67 ms collecting
    1766 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    290635040 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-peval:
    3 collections
    105 ms elapsed cpu time, including 37 ms collecting
    106 ms elapsed real time, including 37 ms collecting
    94 ms elapsed user time, including 27 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    11061888 bytes allocated
running stats for peval (400):
    70 collections
    1774 ms elapsed cpu time, including 67 ms collecting
    1774 ms elapsed real time, including 68 ms collecting
    1765 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    290635040 bytes allocated
running pi
running stats for compile-pi:
    1 collection
    55 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    56 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3939040 bytes allocated
running stats for pi (3):
    92 collections
    523 ms elapsed cpu time, including 63 ms collecting
    524 ms elapsed real time, including 64 ms collecting
    517 ms elapsed user time, including 57 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    384915016 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-pi:
    1 collection
    55 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    55 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3939040 bytes allocated
running stats for pi (3):
    92 collections
    522 ms elapsed cpu time, including 63 ms collecting
    524 ms elapsed real time, including 63 ms collecting
    516 ms elapsed user time, including 57 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    384915016 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-pi:
    1 collection
    55 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    56 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3939040 bytes allocated
running stats for pi (3):
    92 collections
    522 ms elapsed cpu time, including 63 ms collecting
    523 ms elapsed real time, including 63 ms collecting
    516 ms elapsed user time, including 57 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    384915016 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-pi:
    1 collection
    55 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    57 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3939040 bytes allocated
running stats for pi (3):
    92 collections
    522 ms elapsed cpu time, including 63 ms collecting
    523 ms elapsed real time, including 63 ms collecting
    516 ms elapsed user time, including 57 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    384915016 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-pi:
    1 collection
    55 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    56 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3939040 bytes allocated
running stats for pi (3):
    92 collections
    522 ms elapsed cpu time, including 63 ms collecting
    524 ms elapsed real time, including 63 ms collecting
    516 ms elapsed user time, including 57 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    384915016 bytes allocated
running pnpoly
running stats for compile-pnpoly:
    1 collection
    52 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    53 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    42 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2892784 bytes allocated
running stats for pnpoly (140000):
    112 collections
    1328 ms elapsed cpu time, including 64 ms collecting
    1329 ms elapsed real time, including 65 ms collecting
    1322 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    469296384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-pnpoly:
    1 collection
    52 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    53 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    42 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2892784 bytes allocated
running stats for pnpoly (140000):
    112 collections
    1328 ms elapsed cpu time, including 64 ms collecting
    1330 ms elapsed real time, including 65 ms collecting
    1322 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    469296384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-pnpoly:
    1 collection
    52 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    53 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    42 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2892784 bytes allocated
running stats for pnpoly (140000):
    112 collections
    1328 ms elapsed cpu time, including 65 ms collecting
    1329 ms elapsed real time, including 65 ms collecting
    1322 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    469296384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-pnpoly:
    1 collection
    52 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    53 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    42 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2892784 bytes allocated
running stats for pnpoly (140000):
    112 collections
    1328 ms elapsed cpu time, including 65 ms collecting
    1330 ms elapsed real time, including 65 ms collecting
    1322 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    469296384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-pnpoly:
    1 collection
    52 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    53 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    42 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2892784 bytes allocated
running stats for pnpoly (140000):
    112 collections
    1328 ms elapsed cpu time, including 65 ms collecting
    1329 ms elapsed real time, including 65 ms collecting
    1322 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    469296384 bytes allocated
running primes
running stats for compile-primes:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1910264 bytes allocated
running stats for primes (180000):
    158 collections
    1843 ms elapsed cpu time, including 68 ms collecting
    1845 ms elapsed real time, including 70 ms collecting
    1837 ms elapsed user time, including 63 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    663856384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-primes:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1910264 bytes allocated
running stats for primes (180000):
    158 collections
    1842 ms elapsed cpu time, including 69 ms collecting
    1844 ms elapsed real time, including 70 ms collecting
    1836 ms elapsed user time, including 63 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    663856384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-primes:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1910264 bytes allocated
running stats for primes (180000):
    158 collections
    1843 ms elapsed cpu time, including 69 ms collecting
    1845 ms elapsed real time, including 70 ms collecting
    1837 ms elapsed user time, including 63 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    663856384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-primes:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1910264 bytes allocated
running stats for primes (180000):
    158 collections
    1843 ms elapsed cpu time, including 68 ms collecting
    1845 ms elapsed real time, including 70 ms collecting
    1837 ms elapsed user time, including 63 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    663856384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-primes:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1910264 bytes allocated
running stats for primes (180000):
    158 collections
    1842 ms elapsed cpu time, including 68 ms collecting
    1844 ms elapsed real time, including 70 ms collecting
    1836 ms elapsed user time, including 63 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    663856384 bytes allocated
running puzzle
running stats for compile-puzzle:
    2 collections
    62 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    63 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    52 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4559360 bytes allocated
running stats for puzzle (180):
    21 collections
    1856 ms elapsed cpu time, including 41 ms collecting
    1857 ms elapsed real time, including 41 ms collecting
    1844 ms elapsed user time, including 35 ms collecting
    12 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    90798576 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-puzzle:
    2 collections
    62 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    63 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    52 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4559360 bytes allocated
running stats for puzzle (180):
    21 collections
    1855 ms elapsed cpu time, including 41 ms collecting
    1857 ms elapsed real time, including 41 ms collecting
    1844 ms elapsed user time, including 35 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    90798576 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-puzzle:
    2 collections
    62 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    63 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    52 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4559360 bytes allocated
running stats for puzzle (180):
    21 collections
    1856 ms elapsed cpu time, including 41 ms collecting
    1857 ms elapsed real time, including 41 ms collecting
    1844 ms elapsed user time, including 35 ms collecting
    12 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    90798576 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-puzzle:
    2 collections
    62 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    63 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    52 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4559360 bytes allocated
running stats for puzzle (180):
    21 collections
    1856 ms elapsed cpu time, including 41 ms collecting
    1858 ms elapsed real time, including 41 ms collecting
    1844 ms elapsed user time, including 35 ms collecting
    12 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    90798576 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-puzzle:
    2 collections
    62 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    63 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    52 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4559360 bytes allocated
running stats for puzzle (180):
    21 collections
    1856 ms elapsed cpu time, including 41 ms collecting
    1857 ms elapsed real time, including 41 ms collecting
    1844 ms elapsed user time, including 35 ms collecting
    12 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    90798576 bytes allocated
running quicksort
running stats for compile-quicksort:
    1 collection
    52 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    53 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    42 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3091936 bytes allocated
running stats for quicksort30 (60):
    38 collections
    1583 ms elapsed cpu time, including 62 ms collecting
    1585 ms elapsed real time, including 62 ms collecting
    1570 ms elapsed user time, including 49 ms collecting
    13 ms elapsed sys time, including 13 ms collecting
    157368624 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-quicksort:
    1 collection
    52 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    53 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    42 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3091936 bytes allocated
running stats for quicksort30 (60):
    38 collections
    1582 ms elapsed cpu time, including 61 ms collecting
    1584 ms elapsed real time, including 62 ms collecting
    1569 ms elapsed user time, including 48 ms collecting
    13 ms elapsed sys time, including 13 ms collecting
    157368624 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-quicksort:
    1 collection
    52 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    53 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    42 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3091936 bytes allocated
running stats for quicksort30 (60):
    38 collections
    1582 ms elapsed cpu time, including 61 ms collecting
    1583 ms elapsed real time, including 62 ms collecting
    1569 ms elapsed user time, including 48 ms collecting
    13 ms elapsed sys time, including 13 ms collecting
    157368624 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-quicksort:
    1 collection
    52 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    53 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    42 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3091936 bytes allocated
running stats for quicksort30 (60):
    38 collections
    1583 ms elapsed cpu time, including 62 ms collecting
    1583 ms elapsed real time, including 62 ms collecting
    1570 ms elapsed user time, including 49 ms collecting
    13 ms elapsed sys time, including 13 ms collecting
    157368624 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-quicksort:
    1 collection
    52 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    53 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    42 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3091936 bytes allocated
running stats for quicksort30 (60):
    38 collections
    1582 ms elapsed cpu time, including 61 ms collecting
    1584 ms elapsed real time, including 62 ms collecting
    1569 ms elapsed user time, including 48 ms collecting
    13 ms elapsed sys time, including 13 ms collecting
    157368624 bytes allocated
running ray
running stats for compile-ray:
    2 collections
    68 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    69 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5333632 bytes allocated
running stats for ray (5):
    164 collections
    1347 ms elapsed cpu time, including 74 ms collecting
    1348 ms elapsed real time, including 75 ms collecting
    990 ms elapsed user time, including 66 ms collecting
    357 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    688472288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ray:
    2 collections
    68 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    69 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5333632 bytes allocated
running stats for ray (5):
    164 collections
    1352 ms elapsed cpu time, including 74 ms collecting
    1353 ms elapsed real time, including 75 ms collecting
    994 ms elapsed user time, including 66 ms collecting
    358 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    688472288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ray:
    2 collections
    68 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    69 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5333632 bytes allocated
running stats for ray (5):
    164 collections
    1352 ms elapsed cpu time, including 75 ms collecting
    1354 ms elapsed real time, including 75 ms collecting
    994 ms elapsed user time, including 67 ms collecting
    358 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    688472288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ray:
    2 collections
    68 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    69 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5333632 bytes allocated
running stats for ray (5):
    164 collections
    1347 ms elapsed cpu time, including 74 ms collecting
    1347 ms elapsed real time, including 75 ms collecting
    990 ms elapsed user time, including 66 ms collecting
    357 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    688472288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ray:
    2 collections
    68 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    69 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5333632 bytes allocated
running stats for ray (5):
    164 collections
    1350 ms elapsed cpu time, including 74 ms collecting
    1351 ms elapsed real time, including 75 ms collecting
    993 ms elapsed user time, including 66 ms collecting
    357 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    688472288 bytes allocated
running sboyer
running stats for compile-sboyer:
    2 collections
    71 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    71 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    60 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5915552 bytes allocated
running stats for sboyer0 (200):
    31 collections
    2259 ms elapsed cpu time, including 46 ms collecting
    2260 ms elapsed real time, including 46 ms collecting
    2253 ms elapsed user time, including 40 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    132330688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sboyer:
    2 collections
    71 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    72 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    60 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5915552 bytes allocated
running stats for sboyer0 (200):
    31 collections
    2260 ms elapsed cpu time, including 46 ms collecting
    2261 ms elapsed real time, including 46 ms collecting
    2254 ms elapsed user time, including 40 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    132330688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sboyer:
    2 collections
    71 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    72 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    60 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5915552 bytes allocated
running stats for sboyer0 (200):
    31 collections
    2261 ms elapsed cpu time, including 46 ms collecting
    2261 ms elapsed real time, including 46 ms collecting
    2254 ms elapsed user time, including 40 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    132330688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sboyer:
    2 collections
    71 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    72 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    60 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5915552 bytes allocated
running stats for sboyer0 (200):
    31 collections
    2262 ms elapsed cpu time, including 46 ms collecting
    2263 ms elapsed real time, including 46 ms collecting
    2254 ms elapsed user time, including 40 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    132330688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sboyer:
    2 collections
    71 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    72 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    60 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5915552 bytes allocated
running stats for sboyer0 (200):
    31 collections
    2260 ms elapsed cpu time, including 45 ms collecting
    2261 ms elapsed real time, including 46 ms collecting
    2253 ms elapsed user time, including 39 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    132330688 bytes allocated
running scheme
running stats for compile-scheme:
    4 collections
    167 ms elapsed cpu time, including 71 ms collecting
    167 ms elapsed real time, including 72 ms collecting
    147 ms elapsed user time, including 52 ms collecting
    20 ms elapsed sys time, including 19 ms collecting
    16046472 bytes allocated
running stats for scheme (40000):
    44 collections
    1860 ms elapsed cpu time, including 22 ms collecting
    1860 ms elapsed real time, including 22 ms collecting
    1859 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    184960000 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-scheme:
    4 collections
    166 ms elapsed cpu time, including 71 ms collecting
    167 ms elapsed real time, including 71 ms collecting
    146 ms elapsed user time, including 52 ms collecting
    20 ms elapsed sys time, including 19 ms collecting
    16046472 bytes allocated
running stats for scheme (40000):
    44 collections
    1859 ms elapsed cpu time, including 22 ms collecting
    1859 ms elapsed real time, including 23 ms collecting
    1858 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    184960000 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-scheme:
    4 collections
    166 ms elapsed cpu time, including 70 ms collecting
    167 ms elapsed real time, including 71 ms collecting
    146 ms elapsed user time, including 51 ms collecting
    20 ms elapsed sys time, including 19 ms collecting
    16046472 bytes allocated
running stats for scheme (40000):
    44 collections
    1859 ms elapsed cpu time, including 22 ms collecting
    1859 ms elapsed real time, including 23 ms collecting
    1858 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    184960000 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-scheme:
    4 collections
    166 ms elapsed cpu time, including 70 ms collecting
    167 ms elapsed real time, including 71 ms collecting
    146 ms elapsed user time, including 51 ms collecting
    20 ms elapsed sys time, including 19 ms collecting
    16046472 bytes allocated
running stats for scheme (40000):
    44 collections
    1860 ms elapsed cpu time, including 22 ms collecting
    1859 ms elapsed real time, including 22 ms collecting
    1859 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    184960000 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-scheme:
    4 collections
    166 ms elapsed cpu time, including 70 ms collecting
    167 ms elapsed real time, including 71 ms collecting
    146 ms elapsed user time, including 51 ms collecting
    20 ms elapsed sys time, including 19 ms collecting
    16046472 bytes allocated
running stats for scheme (40000):
    44 collections
    1861 ms elapsed cpu time, including 22 ms collecting
    1861 ms elapsed real time, including 22 ms collecting
    1860 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    184960000 bytes allocated
running simplex
running stats for compile-simplex:
    2 collections
    88 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    88 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    77 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8263576 bytes allocated
running stats for simplex (160000):
    200 collections
    1562 ms elapsed cpu time, including 78 ms collecting
    1562 ms elapsed real time, including 79 ms collecting
    1554 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    834572288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-simplex:
    2 collections
    87 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    88 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    77 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8263576 bytes allocated
running stats for simplex (160000):
    200 collections
    1563 ms elapsed cpu time, including 78 ms collecting
    1564 ms elapsed real time, including 79 ms collecting
    1555 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    834572288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-simplex:
    2 collections
    87 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    88 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    77 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8263576 bytes allocated
running stats for simplex (160000):
    200 collections
    1564 ms elapsed cpu time, including 78 ms collecting
    1566 ms elapsed real time, including 79 ms collecting
    1556 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    834572288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-simplex:
    2 collections
    87 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    88 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    77 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8263576 bytes allocated
running stats for simplex (160000):
    200 collections
    1563 ms elapsed cpu time, including 78 ms collecting
    1565 ms elapsed real time, including 79 ms collecting
    1555 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    834572288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-simplex:
    2 collections
    87 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    88 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    77 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8263576 bytes allocated
running stats for simplex (160000):
    200 collections
    1562 ms elapsed cpu time, including 78 ms collecting
    1562 ms elapsed real time, including 79 ms collecting
    1554 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    834572288 bytes allocated
running slatex
running stats for compile-slatex:
    7 collections
    339 ms elapsed cpu time, including 92 ms collecting
    340 ms elapsed real time, including 92 ms collecting
    319 ms elapsed user time, including 73 ms collecting
    20 ms elapsed sys time, including 19 ms collecting
    29418680 bytes allocated
running stats for slatex (30):
    31 collections
    2455 ms elapsed cpu time, including 475 ms collecting
    3538 ms elapsed real time, including 476 ms collecting
    842 ms elapsed user time, including 165 ms collecting
    1613 ms elapsed sys time, including 310 ms collecting
    126610296 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-slatex:
    7 collections
    340 ms elapsed cpu time, including 92 ms collecting
    341 ms elapsed real time, including 92 ms collecting
    320 ms elapsed user time, including 73 ms collecting
    20 ms elapsed sys time, including 19 ms collecting
    29418680 bytes allocated
running stats for slatex (30):
    31 collections
    2335 ms elapsed cpu time, including 471 ms collecting
    3732 ms elapsed real time, including 472 ms collecting
    872 ms elapsed user time, including 170 ms collecting
    1463 ms elapsed sys time, including 301 ms collecting
    126610296 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-slatex:
    7 collections
    340 ms elapsed cpu time, including 92 ms collecting
    340 ms elapsed real time, including 93 ms collecting
    320 ms elapsed user time, including 73 ms collecting
    20 ms elapsed sys time, including 19 ms collecting
    29418680 bytes allocated
running stats for slatex (30):
    31 collections
    2313 ms elapsed cpu time, including 465 ms collecting
    3774 ms elapsed real time, including 465 ms collecting
    869 ms elapsed user time, including 167 ms collecting
    1444 ms elapsed sys time, including 298 ms collecting
    126610296 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-slatex:
    7 collections
    338 ms elapsed cpu time, including 91 ms collecting
    338 ms elapsed real time, including 91 ms collecting
    318 ms elapsed user time, including 72 ms collecting
    20 ms elapsed sys time, including 19 ms collecting
    29418680 bytes allocated
running stats for slatex (30):
    31 collections
    2314 ms elapsed cpu time, including 465 ms collecting
    3894 ms elapsed real time, including 466 ms collecting
    870 ms elapsed user time, including 168 ms collecting
    1444 ms elapsed sys time, including 297 ms collecting
    126610296 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-slatex:
    7 collections
    340 ms elapsed cpu time, including 93 ms collecting
    342 ms elapsed real time, including 93 ms collecting
    320 ms elapsed user time, including 74 ms collecting
    20 ms elapsed sys time, including 19 ms collecting
    29418680 bytes allocated
running stats for slatex (30):
    31 collections
    2323 ms elapsed cpu time, including 469 ms collecting
    3916 ms elapsed real time, including 470 ms collecting
    872 ms elapsed user time, including 169 ms collecting
    1451 ms elapsed sys time, including 300 ms collecting
    126610296 bytes allocated
running string
running stats for compile-string:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1926424 bytes allocated
running stats for string (4):
    159 collections
    2163 ms elapsed cpu time, including 1357 ms collecting
    2164 ms elapsed real time, including 1358 ms collecting
    1450 ms elapsed user time, including 644 ms collecting
    713 ms elapsed sys time, including 713 ms collecting
    503288704 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-string:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1926424 bytes allocated
running stats for string (4):
    159 collections
    2191 ms elapsed cpu time, including 1382 ms collecting
    2195 ms elapsed real time, including 1386 ms collecting
    1457 ms elapsed user time, including 650 ms collecting
    734 ms elapsed sys time, including 732 ms collecting
    503288704 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-string:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1926424 bytes allocated
running stats for string (4):
    159 collections
    2257 ms elapsed cpu time, including 1444 ms collecting
    2268 ms elapsed real time, including 1452 ms collecting
    1490 ms elapsed user time, including 679 ms collecting
    767 ms elapsed sys time, including 765 ms collecting
    503288704 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-string:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1926424 bytes allocated
running stats for string (4):
    159 collections
    2245 ms elapsed cpu time, including 1432 ms collecting
    2250 ms elapsed real time, including 1437 ms collecting
    1487 ms elapsed user time, including 677 ms collecting
    758 ms elapsed sys time, including 755 ms collecting
    503288704 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-string:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1926424 bytes allocated
running stats for string (4):
    159 collections
    2221 ms elapsed cpu time, including 1410 ms collecting
    2227 ms elapsed real time, including 1415 ms collecting
    1474 ms elapsed user time, including 665 ms collecting
    747 ms elapsed sys time, including 745 ms collecting
    503288704 bytes allocated
running sum
running stats for compile-sum:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1678816 bytes allocated
running stats for sum (30000):
    no collections
    1789 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1797 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1786 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    3 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sum:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1678816 bytes allocated
running stats for sum (30000):
    no collections
    1854 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1858 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1853 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sum:
    1 collection
    51 ms elapsed cpu time, including 36 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    40 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    1678816 bytes allocated
running stats for sum (30000):
    no collections
    1913 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1924 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1910 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    3 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sum:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1678816 bytes allocated
running stats for sum (30000):
    no collections
    1930 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1936 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1927 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    3 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sum:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1678816 bytes allocated
running stats for sum (30000):
    no collections
    1929 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1933 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1927 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    2 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running sum1
running stats for compile-sum1:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1798592 bytes allocated
running stats for sum1 (5):
    101 collections
    2166 ms elapsed cpu time, including 66 ms collecting
    2213 ms elapsed real time, including 66 ms collecting
    2145 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    21 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    422815544 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sum1:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1798592 bytes allocated
running stats for sum1 (5):
    101 collections
    2148 ms elapsed cpu time, including 64 ms collecting
    2151 ms elapsed real time, including 65 ms collecting
    2131 ms elapsed user time, including 57 ms collecting
    17 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    422815544 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sum1:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1798592 bytes allocated
running stats for sum1 (5):
    101 collections
    2151 ms elapsed cpu time, including 64 ms collecting
    2154 ms elapsed real time, including 65 ms collecting
    2133 ms elapsed user time, including 57 ms collecting
    18 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    422815544 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sum1:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1798592 bytes allocated
running stats for sum1 (5):
    101 collections
    2151 ms elapsed cpu time, including 64 ms collecting
    2153 ms elapsed real time, including 65 ms collecting
    2133 ms elapsed user time, including 57 ms collecting
    18 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    422815544 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sum1:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1798592 bytes allocated
running stats for sum1 (5):
    101 collections
    2150 ms elapsed cpu time, including 64 ms collecting
    2152 ms elapsed real time, including 65 ms collecting
    2132 ms elapsed user time, including 57 ms collecting
    18 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    422815544 bytes allocated
running sumfp
running stats for compile-sumfp:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1712088 bytes allocated
running stats for sumfp (8000):
    611 collections
    1199 ms elapsed cpu time, including 145 ms collecting
    1201 ms elapsed real time, including 148 ms collecting
    1188 ms elapsed user time, including 137 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    2560272384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumfp:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1712088 bytes allocated
running stats for sumfp (8000):
    611 collections
    1180 ms elapsed cpu time, including 145 ms collecting
    1183 ms elapsed real time, including 147 ms collecting
    1169 ms elapsed user time, including 137 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    2560272384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumfp:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1712088 bytes allocated
running stats for sumfp (8000):
    611 collections
    1206 ms elapsed cpu time, including 145 ms collecting
    1208 ms elapsed real time, including 148 ms collecting
    1195 ms elapsed user time, including 137 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    2560272384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumfp:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1712088 bytes allocated
running stats for sumfp (8000):
    611 collections
    1200 ms elapsed cpu time, including 145 ms collecting
    1202 ms elapsed real time, including 148 ms collecting
    1189 ms elapsed user time, including 137 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    2560272384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumfp:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1712088 bytes allocated
running stats for sumfp (8000):
    611 collections
    1212 ms elapsed cpu time, including 145 ms collecting
    1214 ms elapsed real time, including 147 ms collecting
    1200 ms elapsed user time, including 137 ms collecting
    12 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    2560272384 bytes allocated
running sumloop
running stats for compile-sumloop:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1820024 bytes allocated
running stats for sumloop (2):
    no collections
    1152 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1154 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1151 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumloop:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1820024 bytes allocated
running stats for sumloop (2):
    no collections
    1151 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1153 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1151 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumloop:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1820024 bytes allocated
running stats for sumloop (2):
    no collections
    1152 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1153 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1151 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumloop:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1820024 bytes allocated
running stats for sumloop (2):
    no collections
    1152 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1154 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1152 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumloop:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1820024 bytes allocated
running stats for sumloop (2):
    no collections
    1155 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1158 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1151 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    4 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running sumloop2
running stats for compile-sumloop2:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1727088 bytes allocated
running stats for sumloop (2):
    no collections
    1543 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1545 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1542 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    48 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumloop2:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1727088 bytes allocated
running stats for sumloop (2):
    no collections
    1543 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1547 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1542 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    48 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumloop2:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1727088 bytes allocated
running stats for sumloop (2):
    no collections
    1543 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1545 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1542 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    48 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumloop2:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1727088 bytes allocated
running stats for sumloop (2):
    no collections
    1543 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1545 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1542 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    48 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumloop2:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1727088 bytes allocated
running stats for sumloop (2):
    no collections
    1544 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1546 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1543 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    48 bytes allocated
running tail
running stats for compile-tail:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1880920 bytes allocated
running stats for tail (4):
    86 collections
    1723 ms elapsed cpu time, including 416 ms collecting
    1874 ms elapsed real time, including 418 ms collecting
    1480 ms elapsed user time, including 262 ms collecting
    243 ms elapsed sys time, including 154 ms collecting
    361732768 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-tail:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1880920 bytes allocated
running stats for tail (4):
    86 collections
    1732 ms elapsed cpu time, including 420 ms collecting
    1857 ms elapsed real time, including 422 ms collecting
    1484 ms elapsed user time, including 264 ms collecting
    248 ms elapsed sys time, including 156 ms collecting
    361732768 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-tail:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1880920 bytes allocated
running stats for tail (4):
    86 collections
    1728 ms elapsed cpu time, including 418 ms collecting
    1851 ms elapsed real time, including 419 ms collecting
    1482 ms elapsed user time, including 262 ms collecting
    246 ms elapsed sys time, including 156 ms collecting
    361732768 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-tail:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1880920 bytes allocated
running stats for tail (4):
    86 collections
    1723 ms elapsed cpu time, including 417 ms collecting
    1847 ms elapsed real time, including 419 ms collecting
    1480 ms elapsed user time, including 262 ms collecting
    243 ms elapsed sys time, including 155 ms collecting
    361732768 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-tail:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1880920 bytes allocated
running stats for tail (4):
    86 collections
    1726 ms elapsed cpu time, including 419 ms collecting
    1851 ms elapsed real time, including 421 ms collecting
    1482 ms elapsed user time, including 263 ms collecting
    244 ms elapsed sys time, including 156 ms collecting
    361732768 bytes allocated
running tak
running stats for compile-tak:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1718264 bytes allocated
running stats for tak (3000):
    no collections
    1935 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1937 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1934 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-tak:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1718264 bytes allocated
running stats for tak (3000):
    no collections
    1935 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1936 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1934 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-tak:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1718264 bytes allocated
running stats for tak (3000):
    no collections
    1935 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1937 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1934 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-tak:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1718264 bytes allocated
running stats for tak (3000):
    no collections
    1935 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1937 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1934 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-tak:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1718264 bytes allocated
running stats for tak (3000):
    no collections
    1935 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1937 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1934 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running takl
running stats for compile-takl:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1903064 bytes allocated
running stats for takl (500):
    no collections
    1893 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1897 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1887 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-takl:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1903064 bytes allocated
running stats for takl (500):
    no collections
    1888 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1891 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1887 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-takl:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1903064 bytes allocated
running stats for takl (500):
    no collections
    1888 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1891 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1887 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-takl:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1903064 bytes allocated
running stats for takl (500):
    no collections
    1888 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1891 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1887 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-takl:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1903064 bytes allocated
running stats for takl (500):
    no collections
    1886 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1890 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1886 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running trav1
running stats for compile-trav1:
    1 collection
    59 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4229552 bytes allocated
running stats for trav1 (150):
    46 collections
    1637 ms elapsed cpu time, including 148 ms collecting
    1639 ms elapsed real time, including 149 ms collecting
    1625 ms elapsed user time, including 137 ms collecting
    12 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    191965208 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-trav1:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4229552 bytes allocated
running stats for trav1 (150):
    46 collections
    1636 ms elapsed cpu time, including 146 ms collecting
    1638 ms elapsed real time, including 147 ms collecting
    1624 ms elapsed user time, including 135 ms collecting
    12 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    191965208 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-trav1:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4229552 bytes allocated
running stats for trav1 (150):
    46 collections
    1637 ms elapsed cpu time, including 147 ms collecting
    1637 ms elapsed real time, including 148 ms collecting
    1625 ms elapsed user time, including 136 ms collecting
    12 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    191965208 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-trav1:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4229552 bytes allocated
running stats for trav1 (150):
    46 collections
    1636 ms elapsed cpu time, including 147 ms collecting
    1638 ms elapsed real time, including 148 ms collecting
    1624 ms elapsed user time, including 136 ms collecting
    12 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    191965208 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-trav1:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4229552 bytes allocated
running stats for trav1 (150):
    46 collections
    1638 ms elapsed cpu time, including 148 ms collecting
    1639 ms elapsed real time, including 149 ms collecting
    1626 ms elapsed user time, including 137 ms collecting
    12 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    191965208 bytes allocated
running trav2
running stats for compile-trav2:
    2 collections
    69 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    69 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5518760 bytes allocated
running stats for trav2 (40):
    no collections
    1870 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1872 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1870 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-trav2:
    2 collections
    70 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    70 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5518760 bytes allocated
running stats for trav2 (40):
    no collections
    1870 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1871 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1870 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-trav2:
    2 collections
    70 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    70 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5518760 bytes allocated
running stats for trav2 (40):
    no collections
    1870 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1871 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1870 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-trav2:
    2 collections
    70 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    70 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5518760 bytes allocated
running stats for trav2 (40):
    no collections
    1870 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1872 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1870 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-trav2:
    2 collections
    70 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    70 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5518760 bytes allocated
running stats for trav2 (40):
    no collections
    1870 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1871 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1870 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running triangl
running stats for compile-triangl:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2396976 bytes allocated
running stats for triangl (12):
    no collections
    1703 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1706 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1702 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    1116000 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-triangl:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2396976 bytes allocated
running stats for triangl (12):
    no collections
    1702 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1704 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1702 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    1116000 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-triangl:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2396976 bytes allocated
running stats for triangl (12):
    no collections
    1702 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1704 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1702 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    1116000 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-triangl:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2396976 bytes allocated
running stats for triangl (12):
    no collections
    1702 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1704 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1702 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    1116000 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-triangl:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2396976 bytes allocated
running stats for triangl (12):
    no collections
    1702 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1703 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1702 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    1116000 bytes allocated
running wc
running stats for compile-wc:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1923424 bytes allocated
running stats for wc (15):
    no collections
    1754 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1754 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1709 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    250440 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-wc:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1923424 bytes allocated
running stats for wc (15):
    no collections
    1754 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1756 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1709 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    250440 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-wc:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1923424 bytes allocated
running stats for wc (15):
    no collections
    1754 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1755 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1709 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    250440 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-wc:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1923424 bytes allocated
running stats for wc (15):
    no collections
    1754 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1756 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1709 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    250440 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-wc:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1923424 bytes allocated
running stats for wc (15):
    no collections
    1754 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1756 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1709 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    250440 bytes allocated
NOW: 2008-06-29 22:30:17    -O1
running ack
running stats for compile-ack:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1661248 bytes allocated
running stats for ack (20):
    no collections
    1428 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1429 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1428 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ack:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1661248 bytes allocated
running stats for ack (20):
    no collections
    1428 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1429 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1428 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ack:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1661248 bytes allocated
running stats for ack (20):
    no collections
    1428 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1429 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1428 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ack:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1661248 bytes allocated
running stats for ack (20):
    no collections
    1428 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1429 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1428 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ack:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1661248 bytes allocated
running stats for ack (20):
    no collections
    1428 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1429 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1428 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running array1
running stats for compile-array1:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1996608 bytes allocated
running stats for array1 (2):
    80 collections
    1237 ms elapsed cpu time, including 226 ms collecting
    1239 ms elapsed real time, including 228 ms collecting
    1158 ms elapsed user time, including 153 ms collecting
    79 ms elapsed sys time, including 73 ms collecting
    320025984 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-array1:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1996608 bytes allocated
running stats for array1 (2):
    80 collections
    1229 ms elapsed cpu time, including 224 ms collecting
    1230 ms elapsed real time, including 225 ms collecting
    1157 ms elapsed user time, including 152 ms collecting
    72 ms elapsed sys time, including 72 ms collecting
    320025984 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-array1:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1996608 bytes allocated
running stats for array1 (2):
    80 collections
    1229 ms elapsed cpu time, including 225 ms collecting
    1230 ms elapsed real time, including 226 ms collecting
    1156 ms elapsed user time, including 152 ms collecting
    73 ms elapsed sys time, including 73 ms collecting
    320025984 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-array1:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1996608 bytes allocated
running stats for array1 (2):
    80 collections
    1231 ms elapsed cpu time, including 224 ms collecting
    1231 ms elapsed real time, including 225 ms collecting
    1158 ms elapsed user time, including 152 ms collecting
    73 ms elapsed sys time, including 72 ms collecting
    320025984 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-array1:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1996608 bytes allocated
running stats for array1 (2):
    80 collections
    1228 ms elapsed cpu time, including 224 ms collecting
    1229 ms elapsed real time, including 226 ms collecting
    1155 ms elapsed user time, including 152 ms collecting
    73 ms elapsed sys time, including 72 ms collecting
    320025984 bytes allocated
running bibfreq
running stats for compile-bibfreq:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2095136 bytes allocated
running stats for bibfreq (2):
    34 collections
    2765 ms elapsed cpu time, including 75 ms collecting
    2766 ms elapsed real time, including 76 ms collecting
    2743 ms elapsed user time, including 66 ms collecting
    22 ms elapsed sys time, including 9 ms collecting
    144979472 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-bibfreq:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2095136 bytes allocated
running stats for bibfreq (2):
    34 collections
    2766 ms elapsed cpu time, including 75 ms collecting
    2768 ms elapsed real time, including 76 ms collecting
    2744 ms elapsed user time, including 66 ms collecting
    22 ms elapsed sys time, including 9 ms collecting
    144979472 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-bibfreq:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2095136 bytes allocated
running stats for bibfreq (2):
    34 collections
    2763 ms elapsed cpu time, including 75 ms collecting
    2765 ms elapsed real time, including 76 ms collecting
    2741 ms elapsed user time, including 66 ms collecting
    22 ms elapsed sys time, including 9 ms collecting
    144979472 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-bibfreq:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2095136 bytes allocated
running stats for bibfreq (2):
    34 collections
    2759 ms elapsed cpu time, including 75 ms collecting
    2761 ms elapsed real time, including 76 ms collecting
    2737 ms elapsed user time, including 66 ms collecting
    22 ms elapsed sys time, including 9 ms collecting
    144979472 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-bibfreq:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2095136 bytes allocated
running stats for bibfreq (2):
    34 collections
    2763 ms elapsed cpu time, including 75 ms collecting
    2764 ms elapsed real time, including 76 ms collecting
    2741 ms elapsed user time, including 66 ms collecting
    22 ms elapsed sys time, including 9 ms collecting
    144979472 bytes allocated
running boyer
running stats for compile-boyer:
    1 collection
    59 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    60 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4326472 bytes allocated
running stats for boyer (50):
    22 collections
    1810 ms elapsed cpu time, including 67 ms collecting
    1812 ms elapsed real time, including 67 ms collecting
    1802 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    90601984 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-boyer:
    1 collection
    59 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    60 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4326472 bytes allocated
running stats for boyer (50):
    22 collections
    1810 ms elapsed cpu time, including 67 ms collecting
    1812 ms elapsed real time, including 68 ms collecting
    1802 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    90601984 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-boyer:
    1 collection
    59 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    60 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4326472 bytes allocated
running stats for boyer (50):
    22 collections
    1810 ms elapsed cpu time, including 67 ms collecting
    1811 ms elapsed real time, including 68 ms collecting
    1801 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    90601984 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-boyer:
    1 collection
    59 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    60 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4326472 bytes allocated
running stats for boyer (50):
    22 collections
    1810 ms elapsed cpu time, including 67 ms collecting
    1812 ms elapsed real time, including 68 ms collecting
    1802 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    90601984 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-boyer:
    1 collection
    59 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    60 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4326472 bytes allocated
running stats for boyer (50):
    22 collections
    1812 ms elapsed cpu time, including 67 ms collecting
    1814 ms elapsed real time, including 68 ms collecting
    1802 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    90601984 bytes allocated
running browse
running stats for compile-browse:
    2 collections
    61 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    62 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4489880 bytes allocated
running stats for browse (600):
    110 collections
    1876 ms elapsed cpu time, including 65 ms collecting
    1877 ms elapsed real time, including 65 ms collecting
    1869 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    464172288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-browse:
    2 collections
    61 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    62 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4489880 bytes allocated
running stats for browse (600):
    110 collections
    1875 ms elapsed cpu time, including 64 ms collecting
    1877 ms elapsed real time, including 65 ms collecting
    1869 ms elapsed user time, including 58 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    464172288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-browse:
    2 collections
    62 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    62 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4489880 bytes allocated
running stats for browse (600):
    110 collections
    1876 ms elapsed cpu time, including 65 ms collecting
    1877 ms elapsed real time, including 65 ms collecting
    1869 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    464172288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-browse:
    2 collections
    61 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    62 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4489880 bytes allocated
running stats for browse (600):
    110 collections
    1875 ms elapsed cpu time, including 65 ms collecting
    1877 ms elapsed real time, including 65 ms collecting
    1869 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    464172288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-browse:
    2 collections
    61 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    62 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4489880 bytes allocated
running stats for browse (600):
    110 collections
    1876 ms elapsed cpu time, including 65 ms collecting
    1878 ms elapsed real time, including 65 ms collecting
    1869 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    464172288 bytes allocated
running cat
running stats for compile-cat:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1672160 bytes allocated
running stats for cat (12):
    no collections
    1816 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    2625 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1585 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    231 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    398400 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-cat:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1672160 bytes allocated
running stats for cat (12):
    no collections
    1816 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    2261 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1584 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    232 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    398400 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-cat:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1672160 bytes allocated
running stats for cat (12):
    no collections
    1815 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    2266 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1585 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    230 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    398400 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-cat:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1672160 bytes allocated
running stats for cat (12):
    no collections
    1818 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    2416 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1587 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    231 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    398400 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-cat:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1672160 bytes allocated
running stats for cat (12):
    no collections
    1815 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    2256 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1584 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    231 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    398400 bytes allocated
running compiler
running stats for compile-compiler:
    45 collections
    2184 ms elapsed cpu time, including 725 ms collecting
    2185 ms elapsed real time, including 726 ms collecting
    2103 ms elapsed user time, including 646 ms collecting
    81 ms elapsed sys time, including 79 ms collecting
    186680488 bytes allocated
running stats for compiler (500):
    75 collections
    1706 ms elapsed cpu time, including 129 ms collecting
    1706 ms elapsed real time, including 129 ms collecting
    1678 ms elapsed user time, including 102 ms collecting
    28 ms elapsed sys time, including 27 ms collecting
    313484016 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-compiler:
    45 collections
    2183 ms elapsed cpu time, including 725 ms collecting
    2184 ms elapsed real time, including 726 ms collecting
    2102 ms elapsed user time, including 646 ms collecting
    81 ms elapsed sys time, including 79 ms collecting
    186680488 bytes allocated
running stats for compiler (500):
    75 collections
    1715 ms elapsed cpu time, including 130 ms collecting
    1716 ms elapsed real time, including 130 ms collecting
    1681 ms elapsed user time, including 103 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed sys time, including 27 ms collecting
    313484016 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-compiler:
    45 collections
    2183 ms elapsed cpu time, including 724 ms collecting
    2183 ms elapsed real time, including 725 ms collecting
    2102 ms elapsed user time, including 645 ms collecting
    81 ms elapsed sys time, including 79 ms collecting
    186680488 bytes allocated
running stats for compiler (500):
    75 collections
    1706 ms elapsed cpu time, including 129 ms collecting
    1706 ms elapsed real time, including 129 ms collecting
    1678 ms elapsed user time, including 102 ms collecting
    28 ms elapsed sys time, including 27 ms collecting
    313484016 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-compiler:
    45 collections
    2183 ms elapsed cpu time, including 724 ms collecting
    2183 ms elapsed real time, including 725 ms collecting
    2102 ms elapsed user time, including 645 ms collecting
    81 ms elapsed sys time, including 79 ms collecting
    186680488 bytes allocated
running stats for compiler (500):
    75 collections
    1705 ms elapsed cpu time, including 129 ms collecting
    1705 ms elapsed real time, including 129 ms collecting
    1677 ms elapsed user time, including 102 ms collecting
    28 ms elapsed sys time, including 27 ms collecting
    313484016 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-compiler:
    45 collections
    2183 ms elapsed cpu time, including 725 ms collecting
    2184 ms elapsed real time, including 725 ms collecting
    2102 ms elapsed user time, including 646 ms collecting
    81 ms elapsed sys time, including 79 ms collecting
    186680488 bytes allocated
running stats for compiler (500):
    75 collections
    1705 ms elapsed cpu time, including 129 ms collecting
    1706 ms elapsed real time, including 130 ms collecting
    1677 ms elapsed user time, including 102 ms collecting
    28 ms elapsed sys time, including 27 ms collecting
    313484016 bytes allocated
running conform
running stats for compile-conform:
    3 collections
    88 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    88 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    77 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8786344 bytes allocated
running stats for conform (70):
    30 collections
    1603 ms elapsed cpu time, including 51 ms collecting
    1603 ms elapsed real time, including 52 ms collecting
    1596 ms elapsed user time, including 45 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    125539648 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-conform:
    3 collections
    88 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    89 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    77 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8786344 bytes allocated
running stats for conform (70):
    30 collections
    1603 ms elapsed cpu time, including 51 ms collecting
    1604 ms elapsed real time, including 52 ms collecting
    1596 ms elapsed user time, including 45 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    125539648 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-conform:
    3 collections
    89 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    89 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    78 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8786344 bytes allocated
running stats for conform (70):
    30 collections
    1602 ms elapsed cpu time, including 51 ms collecting
    1604 ms elapsed real time, including 52 ms collecting
    1595 ms elapsed user time, including 45 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    125539648 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-conform:
    3 collections
    88 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    89 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    77 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8786344 bytes allocated
running stats for conform (70):
    30 collections
    1603 ms elapsed cpu time, including 51 ms collecting
    1604 ms elapsed real time, including 52 ms collecting
    1596 ms elapsed user time, including 45 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    125539648 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-conform:
    3 collections
    89 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    89 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    78 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8786344 bytes allocated
running stats for conform (70):
    30 collections
    1603 ms elapsed cpu time, including 52 ms collecting
    1603 ms elapsed real time, including 53 ms collecting
    1596 ms elapsed user time, including 46 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    125539648 bytes allocated
running cpstak
running stats for compile-cpstak:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1799776 bytes allocated
running stats for cpstak (1700):
    413 collections
    1884 ms elapsed cpu time, including 111 ms collecting
    1884 ms elapsed real time, including 113 ms collecting
    1876 ms elapsed user time, including 104 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1730153984 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-cpstak:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1799776 bytes allocated
running stats for cpstak (1700):
    413 collections
    1885 ms elapsed cpu time, including 111 ms collecting
    1886 ms elapsed real time, including 113 ms collecting
    1877 ms elapsed user time, including 104 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1730153984 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-cpstak:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1799776 bytes allocated
running stats for cpstak (1700):
    413 collections
    1881 ms elapsed cpu time, including 111 ms collecting
    1883 ms elapsed real time, including 113 ms collecting
    1873 ms elapsed user time, including 104 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1730153984 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-cpstak:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1799776 bytes allocated
running stats for cpstak (1700):
    413 collections
    1888 ms elapsed cpu time, including 112 ms collecting
    1890 ms elapsed real time, including 113 ms collecting
    1878 ms elapsed user time, including 105 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1730153984 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-cpstak:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1799776 bytes allocated
running stats for cpstak (1700):
    413 collections
    1882 ms elapsed cpu time, including 111 ms collecting
    1884 ms elapsed real time, including 113 ms collecting
    1874 ms elapsed user time, including 104 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1730153984 bytes allocated
running ctak
running stats for compile-ctak:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1872752 bytes allocated
running stats for ctak (160):
    165 collections
    1856 ms elapsed cpu time, including 271 ms collecting
    1858 ms elapsed real time, including 272 ms collecting
    1503 ms elapsed user time, including 117 ms collecting
    353 ms elapsed sys time, including 154 ms collecting
    692083568 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ctak:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1872752 bytes allocated
running stats for ctak (160):
    165 collections
    1865 ms elapsed cpu time, including 272 ms collecting
    1867 ms elapsed real time, including 273 ms collecting
    1509 ms elapsed user time, including 117 ms collecting
    356 ms elapsed sys time, including 155 ms collecting
    692083568 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ctak:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1872752 bytes allocated
running stats for ctak (160):
    165 collections
    1865 ms elapsed cpu time, including 271 ms collecting
    1867 ms elapsed real time, including 272 ms collecting
    1510 ms elapsed user time, including 117 ms collecting
    355 ms elapsed sys time, including 154 ms collecting
    692083568 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ctak:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1872752 bytes allocated
running stats for ctak (160):
    165 collections
    1856 ms elapsed cpu time, including 271 ms collecting
    1858 ms elapsed real time, including 272 ms collecting
    1503 ms elapsed user time, including 117 ms collecting
    353 ms elapsed sys time, including 154 ms collecting
    692083568 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ctak:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1872752 bytes allocated
running stats for ctak (160):
    165 collections
    1857 ms elapsed cpu time, including 271 ms collecting
    1859 ms elapsed real time, including 272 ms collecting
    1502 ms elapsed user time, including 117 ms collecting
    355 ms elapsed sys time, including 154 ms collecting
    692083568 bytes allocated
running dderiv
running stats for compile-dderiv:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2495440 bytes allocated
running stats for dderiv (3000000):
    281 collections
    1823 ms elapsed cpu time, including 97 ms collecting
    1824 ms elapsed real time, including 98 ms collecting
    1815 ms elapsed user time, including 91 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    1176016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-dderiv:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2495440 bytes allocated
running stats for dderiv (3000000):
    281 collections
    1823 ms elapsed cpu time, including 97 ms collecting
    1824 ms elapsed real time, including 99 ms collecting
    1815 ms elapsed user time, including 91 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    1176016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-dderiv:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2495440 bytes allocated
running stats for dderiv (3000000):
    281 collections
    1822 ms elapsed cpu time, including 97 ms collecting
    1823 ms elapsed real time, including 99 ms collecting
    1814 ms elapsed user time, including 91 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    1176016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-dderiv:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2495440 bytes allocated
running stats for dderiv (3000000):
    281 collections
    1822 ms elapsed cpu time, including 97 ms collecting
    1823 ms elapsed real time, including 99 ms collecting
    1814 ms elapsed user time, including 91 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    1176016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-dderiv:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2495440 bytes allocated
running stats for dderiv (3000000):
    281 collections
    1822 ms elapsed cpu time, including 97 ms collecting
    1823 ms elapsed real time, including 99 ms collecting
    1814 ms elapsed user time, including 91 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    1176016384 bytes allocated
running deriv
running stats for compile-deriv:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2018248 bytes allocated
running stats for deriv (4000000):
    374 collections
    1703 ms elapsed cpu time, including 107 ms collecting
    1704 ms elapsed real time, including 108 ms collecting
    1695 ms elapsed user time, including 100 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1568016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-deriv:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2018248 bytes allocated
running stats for deriv (4000000):
    374 collections
    1706 ms elapsed cpu time, including 107 ms collecting
    1707 ms elapsed real time, including 108 ms collecting
    1698 ms elapsed user time, including 100 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1568016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-deriv:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2018248 bytes allocated
running stats for deriv (4000000):
    374 collections
    1703 ms elapsed cpu time, including 107 ms collecting
    1705 ms elapsed real time, including 109 ms collecting
    1695 ms elapsed user time, including 100 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1568016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-deriv:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2018248 bytes allocated
running stats for deriv (4000000):
    374 collections
    1710 ms elapsed cpu time, including 107 ms collecting
    1711 ms elapsed real time, including 109 ms collecting
    1697 ms elapsed user time, including 100 ms collecting
    13 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1568016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-deriv:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2018248 bytes allocated
running stats for deriv (4000000):
    374 collections
    1704 ms elapsed cpu time, including 106 ms collecting
    1706 ms elapsed real time, including 108 ms collecting
    1696 ms elapsed user time, including 100 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    1568016384 bytes allocated
running destruc
running stats for compile-destruc:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2458520 bytes allocated
running stats for destruc (800):
    69 collections
    1719 ms elapsed cpu time, including 61 ms collecting
    1720 ms elapsed real time, including 61 ms collecting
    1713 ms elapsed user time, including 55 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    286909184 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-destruc:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2458520 bytes allocated
running stats for destruc (800):
    69 collections
    1718 ms elapsed cpu time, including 60 ms collecting
    1720 ms elapsed real time, including 61 ms collecting
    1712 ms elapsed user time, including 54 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    286909184 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-destruc:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2458520 bytes allocated
running stats for destruc (800):
    69 collections
    1726 ms elapsed cpu time, including 60 ms collecting
    1744 ms elapsed real time, including 61 ms collecting
    1718 ms elapsed user time, including 54 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    286909184 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-destruc:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2458520 bytes allocated
running stats for destruc (800):
    69 collections
    1721 ms elapsed cpu time, including 60 ms collecting
    1725 ms elapsed real time, including 61 ms collecting
    1714 ms elapsed user time, including 54 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    286909184 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-destruc:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2458520 bytes allocated
running stats for destruc (800):
    69 collections
    1719 ms elapsed cpu time, including 61 ms collecting
    1720 ms elapsed real time, including 61 ms collecting
    1713 ms elapsed user time, including 55 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    286909184 bytes allocated
running diviter
running stats for compile-diviter:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1768968 bytes allocated
running stats for diviter (1200000):
    229 collections
    1088 ms elapsed cpu time, including 76 ms collecting
    1088 ms elapsed real time, including 78 ms collecting
    1081 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    960016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-diviter:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1768968 bytes allocated
running stats for diviter (1200000):
    229 collections
    1088 ms elapsed cpu time, including 76 ms collecting
    1088 ms elapsed real time, including 77 ms collecting
    1081 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    960016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-diviter:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1768968 bytes allocated
running stats for diviter (1200000):
    229 collections
    1088 ms elapsed cpu time, including 76 ms collecting
    1089 ms elapsed real time, including 77 ms collecting
    1081 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    960016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-diviter:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1768968 bytes allocated
running stats for diviter (1200000):
    229 collections
    1088 ms elapsed cpu time, including 76 ms collecting
    1088 ms elapsed real time, including 77 ms collecting
    1081 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    960016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-diviter:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1768968 bytes allocated
running stats for diviter (1200000):
    229 collections
    1088 ms elapsed cpu time, including 76 ms collecting
    1088 ms elapsed real time, including 77 ms collecting
    1081 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    960016384 bytes allocated
running divrec
running stats for compile-divrec:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1752752 bytes allocated
running stats for divrec (1200000):
    229 collections
    1393 ms elapsed cpu time, including 77 ms collecting
    1394 ms elapsed real time, including 78 ms collecting
    1386 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    960016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-divrec:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1752752 bytes allocated
running stats for divrec (1200000):
    229 collections
    1394 ms elapsed cpu time, including 77 ms collecting
    1396 ms elapsed real time, including 78 ms collecting
    1387 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    960016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-divrec:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1752752 bytes allocated
running stats for divrec (1200000):
    229 collections
    1395 ms elapsed cpu time, including 77 ms collecting
    1395 ms elapsed real time, including 78 ms collecting
    1388 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    960016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-divrec:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1752752 bytes allocated
running stats for divrec (1200000):
    229 collections
    1394 ms elapsed cpu time, including 77 ms collecting
    1395 ms elapsed real time, including 78 ms collecting
    1387 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    960016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-divrec:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1752752 bytes allocated
running stats for divrec (1200000):
    229 collections
    1393 ms elapsed cpu time, including 77 ms collecting
    1394 ms elapsed real time, including 78 ms collecting
    1386 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    960016384 bytes allocated
running dynamic
running stats for compile-dynamic:
    7 collections
    305 ms elapsed cpu time, including 97 ms collecting
    307 ms elapsed real time, including 97 ms collecting
    285 ms elapsed user time, including 77 ms collecting
    20 ms elapsed sys time, including 20 ms collecting
    26638840 bytes allocated
running stats for dynamic (70):
    63 collections
    1973 ms elapsed cpu time, including 180 ms collecting
    1974 ms elapsed real time, including 181 ms collecting
    1950 ms elapsed user time, including 169 ms collecting
    23 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    264535568 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-dynamic:
    7 collections
    304 ms elapsed cpu time, including 97 ms collecting
    305 ms elapsed real time, including 97 ms collecting
    284 ms elapsed user time, including 77 ms collecting
    20 ms elapsed sys time, including 20 ms collecting
    26638840 bytes allocated
running stats for dynamic (70):
    63 collections
    1974 ms elapsed cpu time, including 182 ms collecting
    1974 ms elapsed real time, including 182 ms collecting
    1950 ms elapsed user time, including 170 ms collecting
    24 ms elapsed sys time, including 12 ms collecting
    264535568 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-dynamic:
    7 collections
    305 ms elapsed cpu time, including 97 ms collecting
    306 ms elapsed real time, including 97 ms collecting
    285 ms elapsed user time, including 77 ms collecting
    20 ms elapsed sys time, including 20 ms collecting
    26638840 bytes allocated
running stats for dynamic (70):
    63 collections
    1979 ms elapsed cpu time, including 183 ms collecting
    1988 ms elapsed real time, including 188 ms collecting
    1954 ms elapsed user time, including 171 ms collecting
    25 ms elapsed sys time, including 12 ms collecting
    264535568 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-dynamic:
    7 collections
    304 ms elapsed cpu time, including 97 ms collecting
    306 ms elapsed real time, including 97 ms collecting
    284 ms elapsed user time, including 77 ms collecting
    20 ms elapsed sys time, including 20 ms collecting
    26638840 bytes allocated
running stats for dynamic (70):
    63 collections
    1973 ms elapsed cpu time, including 180 ms collecting
    1974 ms elapsed real time, including 182 ms collecting
    1950 ms elapsed user time, including 169 ms collecting
    23 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    264535568 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-dynamic:
    7 collections
    305 ms elapsed cpu time, including 97 ms collecting
    306 ms elapsed real time, including 97 ms collecting
    285 ms elapsed user time, including 77 ms collecting
    20 ms elapsed sys time, including 20 ms collecting
    26638840 bytes allocated
running stats for dynamic (70):
    63 collections
    1972 ms elapsed cpu time, including 180 ms collecting
    1973 ms elapsed real time, including 181 ms collecting
    1949 ms elapsed user time, including 169 ms collecting
    23 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    264535568 bytes allocated
running earley
running stats for compile-earley:
    3 collections
    111 ms elapsed cpu time, including 38 ms collecting
    119 ms elapsed real time, including 38 ms collecting
    99 ms elapsed user time, including 27 ms collecting
    12 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    11302384 bytes allocated
running stats for earley (400):
    250 collections
    1844 ms elapsed cpu time, including 262 ms collecting
    1847 ms elapsed real time, including 263 ms collecting
    1832 ms elapsed user time, including 252 ms collecting
    12 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1047442688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-earley:
    3 collections
    103 ms elapsed cpu time, including 36 ms collecting
    104 ms elapsed real time, including 37 ms collecting
    92 ms elapsed user time, including 26 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    11302384 bytes allocated
running stats for earley (400):
    250 collections
    1840 ms elapsed cpu time, including 260 ms collecting
    1842 ms elapsed real time, including 261 ms collecting
    1829 ms elapsed user time, including 250 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1047442688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-earley:
    3 collections
    104 ms elapsed cpu time, including 37 ms collecting
    104 ms elapsed real time, including 37 ms collecting
    93 ms elapsed user time, including 26 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    11302384 bytes allocated
running stats for earley (400):
    250 collections
    1842 ms elapsed cpu time, including 262 ms collecting
    1846 ms elapsed real time, including 264 ms collecting
    1831 ms elapsed user time, including 252 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1047442688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-earley:
    3 collections
    103 ms elapsed cpu time, including 36 ms collecting
    104 ms elapsed real time, including 37 ms collecting
    92 ms elapsed user time, including 26 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    11302384 bytes allocated
running stats for earley (400):
    250 collections
    1839 ms elapsed cpu time, including 261 ms collecting
    1842 ms elapsed real time, including 262 ms collecting
    1828 ms elapsed user time, including 251 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1047442688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-earley:
    3 collections
    104 ms elapsed cpu time, including 37 ms collecting
    105 ms elapsed real time, including 37 ms collecting
    93 ms elapsed user time, including 27 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    11302384 bytes allocated
running stats for earley (400):
    250 collections
    1841 ms elapsed cpu time, including 261 ms collecting
    1841 ms elapsed real time, including 262 ms collecting
    1830 ms elapsed user time, including 251 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1047442688 bytes allocated
running fft
running stats for compile-fft:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    60 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3580456 bytes allocated
running stats for fft (4000):
    444 collections
    1664 ms elapsed cpu time, including 127 ms collecting
    1664 ms elapsed real time, including 129 ms collecting
    1655 ms elapsed user time, including 120 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1855760384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fft:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3580456 bytes allocated
running stats for fft (4000):
    444 collections
    1661 ms elapsed cpu time, including 128 ms collecting
    1662 ms elapsed real time, including 130 ms collecting
    1652 ms elapsed user time, including 121 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1855760384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fft:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3580456 bytes allocated
running stats for fft (4000):
    444 collections
    1658 ms elapsed cpu time, including 127 ms collecting
    1660 ms elapsed real time, including 129 ms collecting
    1650 ms elapsed user time, including 120 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1855760384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fft:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3580456 bytes allocated
running stats for fft (4000):
    444 collections
    1658 ms elapsed cpu time, including 127 ms collecting
    1659 ms elapsed real time, including 129 ms collecting
    1649 ms elapsed user time, including 120 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1855760384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fft:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3580456 bytes allocated
running stats for fft (4000):
    444 collections
    1657 ms elapsed cpu time, including 127 ms collecting
    1657 ms elapsed real time, including 129 ms collecting
    1648 ms elapsed user time, including 120 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1855760384 bytes allocated
running fib
running stats for compile-fib:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1619792 bytes allocated
running stats for fib (6):
    no collections
    1967 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1968 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1967 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fib:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1619792 bytes allocated
running stats for fib (6):
    no collections
    1971 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1972 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1967 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    4 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fib:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1619792 bytes allocated
running stats for fib (6):
    no collections
    1967 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1968 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1967 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fib:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1619792 bytes allocated
running stats for fib (6):
    no collections
    1966 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1966 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1966 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fib:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1619792 bytes allocated
running stats for fib (6):
    no collections
    1968 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1968 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1968 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running fibc
running stats for compile-fibc:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1854264 bytes allocated
running stats for fibc (900):
    115 collections
    1844 ms elapsed cpu time, including 245 ms collecting
    1846 ms elapsed real time, including 246 ms collecting
    1517 ms elapsed user time, including 103 ms collecting
    327 ms elapsed sys time, including 142 ms collecting
    481567360 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fibc:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1854264 bytes allocated
running stats for fibc (900):
    115 collections
    1843 ms elapsed cpu time, including 243 ms collecting
    1845 ms elapsed real time, including 244 ms collecting
    1516 ms elapsed user time, including 102 ms collecting
    327 ms elapsed sys time, including 141 ms collecting
    481567360 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fibc:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1854264 bytes allocated
running stats for fibc (900):
    115 collections
    1844 ms elapsed cpu time, including 244 ms collecting
    1846 ms elapsed real time, including 244 ms collecting
    1518 ms elapsed user time, including 103 ms collecting
    326 ms elapsed sys time, including 141 ms collecting
    481567360 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fibc:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1854264 bytes allocated
running stats for fibc (900):
    115 collections
    1845 ms elapsed cpu time, including 244 ms collecting
    1847 ms elapsed real time, including 245 ms collecting
    1518 ms elapsed user time, including 102 ms collecting
    327 ms elapsed sys time, including 142 ms collecting
    481567360 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fibc:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1854264 bytes allocated
running stats for fibc (900):
    115 collections
    1842 ms elapsed cpu time, including 244 ms collecting
    1843 ms elapsed real time, including 245 ms collecting
    1517 ms elapsed user time, including 103 ms collecting
    325 ms elapsed sys time, including 141 ms collecting
    481567360 bytes allocated
running fibfp
running stats for compile-fibfp:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1662384 bytes allocated
running stats for fibfp (2):
    342 collections
    1127 ms elapsed cpu time, including 102 ms collecting
    1128 ms elapsed real time, including 104 ms collecting
    1119 ms elapsed user time, including 95 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1433330080 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fibfp:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1662384 bytes allocated
running stats for fibfp (2):
    342 collections
    1127 ms elapsed cpu time, including 102 ms collecting
    1127 ms elapsed real time, including 104 ms collecting
    1120 ms elapsed user time, including 96 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    1433330080 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fibfp:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1662384 bytes allocated
running stats for fibfp (2):
    342 collections
    1127 ms elapsed cpu time, including 102 ms collecting
    1128 ms elapsed real time, including 104 ms collecting
    1120 ms elapsed user time, including 96 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    1433330080 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fibfp:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1662384 bytes allocated
running stats for fibfp (2):
    342 collections
    1128 ms elapsed cpu time, including 102 ms collecting
    1128 ms elapsed real time, including 104 ms collecting
    1121 ms elapsed user time, including 96 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    1433330080 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fibfp:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1662384 bytes allocated
running stats for fibfp (2):
    342 collections
    1128 ms elapsed cpu time, including 103 ms collecting
    1128 ms elapsed real time, including 104 ms collecting
    1120 ms elapsed user time, including 96 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1433330080 bytes allocated
running fpsum
running stats for compile-fpsum:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1624032 bytes allocated
running stats for fpsum (60):
    458 collections
    899 ms elapsed cpu time, including 114 ms collecting
    901 ms elapsed real time, including 115 ms collecting
    892 ms elapsed user time, including 107 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1920018304 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fpsum:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1624032 bytes allocated
running stats for fpsum (60):
    458 collections
    896 ms elapsed cpu time, including 114 ms collecting
    897 ms elapsed real time, including 115 ms collecting
    888 ms elapsed user time, including 107 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1920018304 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fpsum:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1624032 bytes allocated
running stats for fpsum (60):
    458 collections
    896 ms elapsed cpu time, including 114 ms collecting
    897 ms elapsed real time, including 116 ms collecting
    888 ms elapsed user time, including 107 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1920018304 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fpsum:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1624032 bytes allocated
running stats for fpsum (60):
    458 collections
    885 ms elapsed cpu time, including 114 ms collecting
    886 ms elapsed real time, including 116 ms collecting
    877 ms elapsed user time, including 107 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1920018304 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fpsum:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1624032 bytes allocated
running stats for fpsum (60):
    458 collections
    901 ms elapsed cpu time, including 114 ms collecting
    902 ms elapsed real time, including 116 ms collecting
    893 ms elapsed user time, including 107 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1920018304 bytes allocated
running gcbench
running stats for compile-gcbench:
    1 collection
    53 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    54 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    43 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3342096 bytes allocated
running stats for GCBench18 (2):
    181 collections
    2517 ms elapsed cpu time, including 679 ms collecting
    2530 ms elapsed real time, including 686 ms collecting
    2428 ms elapsed user time, including 597 ms collecting
    89 ms elapsed sys time, including 82 ms collecting
    757033392 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-gcbench:
    1 collection
    53 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    54 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    43 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3342096 bytes allocated
running stats for GCBench18 (2):
    181 collections
    2514 ms elapsed cpu time, including 677 ms collecting
    2522 ms elapsed real time, including 680 ms collecting
    2428 ms elapsed user time, including 597 ms collecting
    86 ms elapsed sys time, including 80 ms collecting
    757033392 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-gcbench:
    1 collection
    53 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    54 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    43 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3342096 bytes allocated
running stats for GCBench18 (2):
    181 collections
    2515 ms elapsed cpu time, including 678 ms collecting
    2526 ms elapsed real time, including 684 ms collecting
    2430 ms elapsed user time, including 599 ms collecting
    85 ms elapsed sys time, including 79 ms collecting
    757033392 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-gcbench:
    1 collection
    54 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    54 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3342096 bytes allocated
running stats for GCBench18 (2):
    181 collections
    2510 ms elapsed cpu time, including 673 ms collecting
    2519 ms elapsed real time, including 676 ms collecting
    2425 ms elapsed user time, including 594 ms collecting
    85 ms elapsed sys time, including 79 ms collecting
    757033392 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-gcbench:
    1 collection
    53 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    54 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    43 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3342096 bytes allocated
running stats for GCBench18 (2):
    181 collections
    2512 ms elapsed cpu time, including 676 ms collecting
    2519 ms elapsed real time, including 678 ms collecting
    2427 ms elapsed user time, including 596 ms collecting
    85 ms elapsed sys time, including 80 ms collecting
    757033392 bytes allocated
running graphs
running stats for compile-graphs:
    2 collections
    78 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    78 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    67 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    6375488 bytes allocated
running stats for graphs (500):
    285 collections
    1613 ms elapsed cpu time, including 122 ms collecting
    1614 ms elapsed real time, including 123 ms collecting
    1604 ms elapsed user time, including 114 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    1192800288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-graphs:
    2 collections
    78 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    79 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    67 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    6375488 bytes allocated
running stats for graphs (500):
    285 collections
    1614 ms elapsed cpu time, including 122 ms collecting
    1616 ms elapsed real time, including 124 ms collecting
    1605 ms elapsed user time, including 114 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    1192800288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-graphs:
    2 collections
    78 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    78 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    67 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    6375488 bytes allocated
running stats for graphs (500):
    285 collections
    1614 ms elapsed cpu time, including 122 ms collecting
    1615 ms elapsed real time, including 123 ms collecting
    1605 ms elapsed user time, including 114 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    1192800288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-graphs:
    2 collections
    78 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    78 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    67 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    6375488 bytes allocated
running stats for graphs (500):
    285 collections
    1615 ms elapsed cpu time, including 123 ms collecting
    1616 ms elapsed real time, including 124 ms collecting
    1606 ms elapsed user time, including 115 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    1192800288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-graphs:
    2 collections
    78 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    78 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    67 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    6375488 bytes allocated
running stats for graphs (500):
    285 collections
    1613 ms elapsed cpu time, including 122 ms collecting
    1614 ms elapsed real time, including 123 ms collecting
    1604 ms elapsed user time, including 114 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    1192800288 bytes allocated
running lattice
running stats for compile-lattice:
    1 collection
    54 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    55 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3490696 bytes allocated
running stats for lattice (2):
    170 collections
    2519 ms elapsed cpu time, including 72 ms collecting
    2520 ms elapsed real time, including 73 ms collecting
    2512 ms elapsed user time, including 66 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    709273600 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-lattice:
    1 collection
    54 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    55 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3490696 bytes allocated
running stats for lattice (2):
    170 collections
    2518 ms elapsed cpu time, including 72 ms collecting
    2520 ms elapsed real time, including 73 ms collecting
    2511 ms elapsed user time, including 66 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    709273600 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-lattice:
    1 collection
    54 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    55 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3490696 bytes allocated
running stats for lattice (2):
    170 collections
    2518 ms elapsed cpu time, including 71 ms collecting
    2519 ms elapsed real time, including 72 ms collecting
    2511 ms elapsed user time, including 65 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    709273600 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-lattice:
    1 collection
    54 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    55 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3490696 bytes allocated
running stats for lattice (2):
    170 collections
    2518 ms elapsed cpu time, including 72 ms collecting
    2519 ms elapsed real time, including 72 ms collecting
    2511 ms elapsed user time, including 66 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    709273600 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-lattice:
    1 collection
    55 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    55 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3490696 bytes allocated
running stats for lattice (2):
    170 collections
    2519 ms elapsed cpu time, including 71 ms collecting
    2520 ms elapsed real time, including 72 ms collecting
    2512 ms elapsed user time, including 65 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    709273600 bytes allocated
running matrix
running stats for compile-matrix:
    2 collections
    86 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    87 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    75 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8265976 bytes allocated
running stats for matrix (600):
    196 collections
    1596 ms elapsed cpu time, including 78 ms collecting
    1597 ms elapsed real time, including 79 ms collecting
    1588 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    820087488 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-matrix:
    2 collections
    86 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    87 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    75 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8265976 bytes allocated
running stats for matrix (600):
    196 collections
    1595 ms elapsed cpu time, including 77 ms collecting
    1596 ms elapsed real time, including 79 ms collecting
    1587 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    820087488 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-matrix:
    2 collections
    86 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    87 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    75 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    8265976 bytes allocated
running stats for matrix (600):
    196 collections
    1596 ms elapsed cpu time, including 78 ms collecting
    1597 ms elapsed real time, including 79 ms collecting
    1588 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    820087488 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-matrix:
    2 collections
    86 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    87 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    75 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8265976 bytes allocated
running stats for matrix (600):
    196 collections
    1598 ms elapsed cpu time, including 78 ms collecting
    1600 ms elapsed real time, including 79 ms collecting
    1590 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    820087488 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-matrix:
    2 collections
    86 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    87 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    75 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8265976 bytes allocated
running stats for matrix (600):
    196 collections
    1595 ms elapsed cpu time, including 78 ms collecting
    1597 ms elapsed real time, including 79 ms collecting
    1587 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    820087488 bytes allocated
running maze
running stats for compile-maze:
    3 collections
    92 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    92 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    81 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    9132640 bytes allocated
running stats for maze (4000):
    54 collections
    1466 ms elapsed cpu time, including 51 ms collecting
    1467 ms elapsed real time, including 52 ms collecting
    1458 ms elapsed user time, including 44 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    229388304 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-maze:
    3 collections
    92 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    92 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    81 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    9132640 bytes allocated
running stats for maze (4000):
    54 collections
    1466 ms elapsed cpu time, including 51 ms collecting
    1467 ms elapsed real time, including 52 ms collecting
    1458 ms elapsed user time, including 44 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    229388304 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-maze:
    3 collections
    92 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    92 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    81 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    9132640 bytes allocated
running stats for maze (4000):
    54 collections
    1467 ms elapsed cpu time, including 51 ms collecting
    1468 ms elapsed real time, including 52 ms collecting
    1459 ms elapsed user time, including 44 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    229388304 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-maze:
    3 collections
    92 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    92 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    81 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    9132640 bytes allocated
running stats for maze (4000):
    54 collections
    1466 ms elapsed cpu time, including 51 ms collecting
    1466 ms elapsed real time, including 52 ms collecting
    1458 ms elapsed user time, including 44 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    229388304 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-maze:
    3 collections
    92 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    92 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    81 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    9132640 bytes allocated
running stats for maze (4000):
    54 collections
    1467 ms elapsed cpu time, including 51 ms collecting
    1468 ms elapsed real time, including 52 ms collecting
    1459 ms elapsed user time, including 44 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    229388304 bytes allocated
running mazefun
running stats for compile-mazefun:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4050824 bytes allocated
running stats for mazefun (2500):
    90 collections
    2045 ms elapsed cpu time, including 63 ms collecting
    2046 ms elapsed real time, including 63 ms collecting
    2039 ms elapsed user time, including 57 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    376336384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-mazefun:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4050824 bytes allocated
running stats for mazefun (2500):
    90 collections
    2045 ms elapsed cpu time, including 63 ms collecting
    2046 ms elapsed real time, including 63 ms collecting
    2039 ms elapsed user time, including 57 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    376336384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-mazefun:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4050824 bytes allocated
running stats for mazefun (2500):
    90 collections
    2045 ms elapsed cpu time, including 63 ms collecting
    2046 ms elapsed real time, including 63 ms collecting
    2039 ms elapsed user time, including 57 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    376336384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-mazefun:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4050824 bytes allocated
running stats for mazefun (2500):
    90 collections
    2054 ms elapsed cpu time, including 63 ms collecting
    2054 ms elapsed real time, including 63 ms collecting
    2041 ms elapsed user time, including 57 ms collecting
    13 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    376336384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-mazefun:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4050824 bytes allocated
running stats for mazefun (2500):
    90 collections
    2045 ms elapsed cpu time, including 63 ms collecting
    2046 ms elapsed real time, including 63 ms collecting
    2039 ms elapsed user time, including 57 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    376336384 bytes allocated
running mbrot
running stats for compile-mbrot:
    1 collection
    50 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    40 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2518472 bytes allocated
running stats for mbrot (120):
    635 collections
    1336 ms elapsed cpu time, including 168 ms collecting
    1336 ms elapsed real time, including 170 ms collecting
    1327 ms elapsed user time, including 160 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    2658929344 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-mbrot:
    1 collection
    50 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    40 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2518472 bytes allocated
running stats for mbrot (120):
    635 collections
    1324 ms elapsed cpu time, including 169 ms collecting
    1324 ms elapsed real time, including 171 ms collecting
    1314 ms elapsed user time, including 161 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    2658929344 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-mbrot:
    1 collection
    50 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    40 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2518472 bytes allocated
running stats for mbrot (120):
    635 collections
    1339 ms elapsed cpu time, including 168 ms collecting
    1340 ms elapsed real time, including 171 ms collecting
    1329 ms elapsed user time, including 160 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    2658929344 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-mbrot:
    1 collection
    50 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    40 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2518472 bytes allocated
running stats for mbrot (120):
    635 collections
    1345 ms elapsed cpu time, including 167 ms collecting
    1346 ms elapsed real time, including 170 ms collecting
    1336 ms elapsed user time, including 159 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    2658929344 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-mbrot:
    1 collection
    50 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    40 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2518472 bytes allocated
running stats for mbrot (120):
    635 collections
    1341 ms elapsed cpu time, including 168 ms collecting
    1341 ms elapsed real time, including 171 ms collecting
    1331 ms elapsed user time, including 160 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    2658929344 bytes allocated
running nbody
running stats for compile-nbody:
    6 collections
    215 ms elapsed cpu time, including 82 ms collecting
    216 ms elapsed real time, including 83 ms collecting
    195 ms elapsed user time, including 63 ms collecting
    20 ms elapsed sys time, including 19 ms collecting
    22024336 bytes allocated
Unhandled exception:
 Condition components:
   1. &assertion
   2. &who: fl+
   3. &message: "not a flonum"
   4. &irritants: (0)
ERROR: nbody failed
running stats for compile-nbody:
    6 collections
    215 ms elapsed cpu time, including 82 ms collecting
    216 ms elapsed real time, including 83 ms collecting
    195 ms elapsed user time, including 63 ms collecting
    20 ms elapsed sys time, including 19 ms collecting
    22024336 bytes allocated
Unhandled exception:
 Condition components:
   1. &assertion
   2. &who: fl+
   3. &message: "not a flonum"
   4. &irritants: (0)
ERROR: nbody failed
running stats for compile-nbody:
    6 collections
    215 ms elapsed cpu time, including 82 ms collecting
    216 ms elapsed real time, including 83 ms collecting
    195 ms elapsed user time, including 63 ms collecting
    20 ms elapsed sys time, including 19 ms collecting
    22024336 bytes allocated
Unhandled exception:
 Condition components:
   1. &assertion
   2. &who: fl+
   3. &message: "not a flonum"
   4. &irritants: (0)
ERROR: nbody failed
running stats for compile-nbody:
    6 collections
    215 ms elapsed cpu time, including 82 ms collecting
    215 ms elapsed real time, including 83 ms collecting
    195 ms elapsed user time, including 63 ms collecting
    20 ms elapsed sys time, including 19 ms collecting
    22024336 bytes allocated
Unhandled exception:
 Condition components:
   1. &assertion
   2. &who: fl+
   3. &message: "not a flonum"
   4. &irritants: (0)
ERROR: nbody failed
running stats for compile-nbody:
    6 collections
    215 ms elapsed cpu time, including 82 ms collecting
    215 ms elapsed real time, including 83 ms collecting
    195 ms elapsed user time, including 63 ms collecting
    20 ms elapsed sys time, including 19 ms collecting
    22024336 bytes allocated
Unhandled exception:
 Condition components:
   1. &assertion
   2. &who: fl+
   3. &message: "not a flonum"
   4. &irritants: (0)
ERROR: nbody failed
running nboyer
running stats for compile-nboyer:
    2 collections
    69 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    69 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5333960 bytes allocated
running stats for nboyer0 (150):
    73 collections
    1728 ms elapsed cpu time, including 148 ms collecting
    1729 ms elapsed real time, including 149 ms collecting
    1717 ms elapsed user time, including 137 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    305504688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nboyer:
    2 collections
    69 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    70 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5333960 bytes allocated
running stats for nboyer0 (150):
    73 collections
    1729 ms elapsed cpu time, including 148 ms collecting
    1730 ms elapsed real time, including 149 ms collecting
    1718 ms elapsed user time, including 137 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    305504688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nboyer:
    2 collections
    69 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    70 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5333960 bytes allocated
running stats for nboyer0 (150):
    73 collections
    1729 ms elapsed cpu time, including 148 ms collecting
    1730 ms elapsed real time, including 149 ms collecting
    1718 ms elapsed user time, including 138 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    305504688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nboyer:
    2 collections
    69 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    69 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5333960 bytes allocated
running stats for nboyer0 (150):
    73 collections
    1728 ms elapsed cpu time, including 147 ms collecting
    1730 ms elapsed real time, including 149 ms collecting
    1717 ms elapsed user time, including 137 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    305504688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nboyer:
    2 collections
    69 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    69 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5333960 bytes allocated
running stats for nboyer0 (150):
    73 collections
    1728 ms elapsed cpu time, including 148 ms collecting
    1730 ms elapsed real time, including 149 ms collecting
    1717 ms elapsed user time, including 137 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    305504688 bytes allocated
running nqueens
running stats for compile-nqueens:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1946256 bytes allocated
running stats for nqueens (4000):
    92 collections
    1990 ms elapsed cpu time, including 60 ms collecting
    1990 ms elapsed real time, including 62 ms collecting
    1984 ms elapsed user time, including 55 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    384784384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nqueens:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1946256 bytes allocated
running stats for nqueens (4000):
    92 collections
    1990 ms elapsed cpu time, including 61 ms collecting
    1991 ms elapsed real time, including 62 ms collecting
    1984 ms elapsed user time, including 56 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    384784384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nqueens:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1946256 bytes allocated
running stats for nqueens (4000):
    92 collections
    1990 ms elapsed cpu time, including 60 ms collecting
    1990 ms elapsed real time, including 62 ms collecting
    1984 ms elapsed user time, including 55 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    384784384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nqueens:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1946256 bytes allocated
running stats for nqueens (4000):
    92 collections
    1996 ms elapsed cpu time, including 61 ms collecting
    1996 ms elapsed real time, including 62 ms collecting
    1985 ms elapsed user time, including 55 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    384784384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nqueens:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1946256 bytes allocated
running stats for nqueens (4000):
    92 collections
    1990 ms elapsed cpu time, including 60 ms collecting
    1991 ms elapsed real time, including 62 ms collecting
    1984 ms elapsed user time, including 55 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    384784384 bytes allocated
running ntakl
running stats for compile-ntakl:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1833904 bytes allocated
running stats for ntakl (600):
    no collections
    2301 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    2301 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    2301 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ntakl:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1833904 bytes allocated
running stats for ntakl (600):
    no collections
    2301 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    2302 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    2301 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ntakl:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1833904 bytes allocated
running stats for ntakl (600):
    no collections
    2301 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    2301 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    2301 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ntakl:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1833904 bytes allocated
running stats for ntakl (600):
    no collections
    2301 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    2302 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    2301 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ntakl:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1833904 bytes allocated
running stats for ntakl (600):
    no collections
    2301 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    2301 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    2301 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running nucleic
running stats for compile-nucleic:
    8 collections
    288 ms elapsed cpu time, including 86 ms collecting
    288 ms elapsed real time, including 86 ms collecting
    269 ms elapsed user time, including 68 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 18 ms collecting
    31338040 bytes allocated
running stats for nucleic (12):
    267 collections
    1358 ms elapsed cpu time, including 101 ms collecting
    1359 ms elapsed real time, including 102 ms collecting
    1353 ms elapsed user time, including 97 ms collecting
    5 ms elapsed sys time, including 4 ms collecting
    1117206528 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nucleic:
    8 collections
    287 ms elapsed cpu time, including 85 ms collecting
    288 ms elapsed real time, including 85 ms collecting
    268 ms elapsed user time, including 67 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 18 ms collecting
    31338040 bytes allocated
running stats for nucleic (12):
    267 collections
    1358 ms elapsed cpu time, including 101 ms collecting
    1358 ms elapsed real time, including 102 ms collecting
    1353 ms elapsed user time, including 97 ms collecting
    5 ms elapsed sys time, including 4 ms collecting
    1117206528 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nucleic:
    8 collections
    288 ms elapsed cpu time, including 85 ms collecting
    288 ms elapsed real time, including 85 ms collecting
    269 ms elapsed user time, including 67 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 18 ms collecting
    31338040 bytes allocated
running stats for nucleic (12):
    267 collections
    1356 ms elapsed cpu time, including 100 ms collecting
    1357 ms elapsed real time, including 101 ms collecting
    1352 ms elapsed user time, including 97 ms collecting
    4 ms elapsed sys time, including 3 ms collecting
    1117206528 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nucleic:
    8 collections
    287 ms elapsed cpu time, including 85 ms collecting
    289 ms elapsed real time, including 85 ms collecting
    268 ms elapsed user time, including 67 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 18 ms collecting
    31338040 bytes allocated
running stats for nucleic (12):
    267 collections
    1356 ms elapsed cpu time, including 100 ms collecting
    1357 ms elapsed real time, including 102 ms collecting
    1352 ms elapsed user time, including 97 ms collecting
    4 ms elapsed sys time, including 3 ms collecting
    1117206528 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nucleic:
    8 collections
    287 ms elapsed cpu time, including 85 ms collecting
    288 ms elapsed real time, including 85 ms collecting
    268 ms elapsed user time, including 67 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 18 ms collecting
    31338040 bytes allocated
running stats for nucleic (12):
    267 collections
    1357 ms elapsed cpu time, including 101 ms collecting
    1358 ms elapsed real time, including 102 ms collecting
    1352 ms elapsed user time, including 97 ms collecting
    5 ms elapsed sys time, including 4 ms collecting
    1117206528 bytes allocated
running paraffins
running stats for compile-paraffins:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4108912 bytes allocated
running stats for paraffins (1800):
    354 collections
    1684 ms elapsed cpu time, including 596 ms collecting
    1686 ms elapsed real time, including 598 ms collecting
    1667 ms elapsed user time, including 580 ms collecting
    17 ms elapsed sys time, including 16 ms collecting
    1481632384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-paraffins:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4108912 bytes allocated
running stats for paraffins (1800):
    354 collections
    1686 ms elapsed cpu time, including 597 ms collecting
    1687 ms elapsed real time, including 599 ms collecting
    1669 ms elapsed user time, including 581 ms collecting
    17 ms elapsed sys time, including 16 ms collecting
    1481632384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-paraffins:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4108912 bytes allocated
running stats for paraffins (1800):
    354 collections
    1686 ms elapsed cpu time, including 595 ms collecting
    1686 ms elapsed real time, including 597 ms collecting
    1669 ms elapsed user time, including 579 ms collecting
    17 ms elapsed sys time, including 16 ms collecting
    1481632384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-paraffins:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4108912 bytes allocated
running stats for paraffins (1800):
    354 collections
    1695 ms elapsed cpu time, including 599 ms collecting
    1697 ms elapsed real time, including 601 ms collecting
    1671 ms elapsed user time, including 580 ms collecting
    24 ms elapsed sys time, including 19 ms collecting
    1481632384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-paraffins:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4108912 bytes allocated
running stats for paraffins (1800):
    354 collections
    1685 ms elapsed cpu time, including 595 ms collecting
    1687 ms elapsed real time, including 597 ms collecting
    1668 ms elapsed user time, including 579 ms collecting
    17 ms elapsed sys time, including 16 ms collecting
    1481632384 bytes allocated
running parsing
running stats for compile-parsing:
    3 collections
    108 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    108 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    97 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    9921032 bytes allocated
running stats for parsing:parsing-data.ss:360 (360):
    14 collections
    1990 ms elapsed cpu time, including 43 ms collecting
    1991 ms elapsed real time, including 43 ms collecting
    1982 ms elapsed user time, including 35 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    57082368 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-parsing:
    3 collections
    108 ms elapsed cpu time, including 36 ms collecting
    109 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    97 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    9921032 bytes allocated
running stats for parsing:parsing-data.ss:360 (360):
    14 collections
    1990 ms elapsed cpu time, including 43 ms collecting
    1991 ms elapsed real time, including 44 ms collecting
    1982 ms elapsed user time, including 35 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    57082368 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-parsing:
    3 collections
    108 ms elapsed cpu time, including 36 ms collecting
    109 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    97 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    9921032 bytes allocated
running stats for parsing:parsing-data.ss:360 (360):
    14 collections
    1990 ms elapsed cpu time, including 43 ms collecting
    1991 ms elapsed real time, including 43 ms collecting
    1982 ms elapsed user time, including 35 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    57082368 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-parsing:
    3 collections
    108 ms elapsed cpu time, including 36 ms collecting
    109 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    97 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    9921032 bytes allocated
running stats for parsing:parsing-data.ss:360 (360):
    14 collections
    1991 ms elapsed cpu time, including 43 ms collecting
    1991 ms elapsed real time, including 44 ms collecting
    1982 ms elapsed user time, including 35 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    57082368 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-parsing:
    3 collections
    108 ms elapsed cpu time, including 36 ms collecting
    109 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    97 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    9921032 bytes allocated
running stats for parsing:parsing-data.ss:360 (360):
    14 collections
    1990 ms elapsed cpu time, including 43 ms collecting
    1991 ms elapsed real time, including 44 ms collecting
    1982 ms elapsed user time, including 35 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    57082368 bytes allocated
running perm9
running stats for compile-perm9:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2389480 bytes allocated
running stats for perm9 (12):
    43 collections
    1687 ms elapsed cpu time, including 1282 ms collecting
    1689 ms elapsed real time, including 1283 ms collecting
    1403 ms elapsed user time, including 999 ms collecting
    284 ms elapsed sys time, including 283 ms collecting
    179592448 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-perm9:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2389480 bytes allocated
running stats for perm9 (12):
    43 collections
    1687 ms elapsed cpu time, including 1282 ms collecting
    1688 ms elapsed real time, including 1282 ms collecting
    1403 ms elapsed user time, including 999 ms collecting
    284 ms elapsed sys time, including 283 ms collecting
    179592448 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-perm9:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2389480 bytes allocated
running stats for perm9 (12):
    43 collections
    1687 ms elapsed cpu time, including 1282 ms collecting
    1689 ms elapsed real time, including 1283 ms collecting
    1404 ms elapsed user time, including 1000 ms collecting
    283 ms elapsed sys time, including 282 ms collecting
    179592448 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-perm9:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2389480 bytes allocated
running stats for perm9 (12):
    43 collections
    1686 ms elapsed cpu time, including 1282 ms collecting
    1688 ms elapsed real time, including 1282 ms collecting
    1403 ms elapsed user time, including 999 ms collecting
    283 ms elapsed sys time, including 283 ms collecting
    179592448 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-perm9:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2389480 bytes allocated
running stats for perm9 (12):
    43 collections
    1686 ms elapsed cpu time, including 1281 ms collecting
    1687 ms elapsed real time, including 1281 ms collecting
    1402 ms elapsed user time, including 998 ms collecting
    284 ms elapsed sys time, including 283 ms collecting
    179592448 bytes allocated
running peval
running stats for compile-peval:
    3 collections
    108 ms elapsed cpu time, including 37 ms collecting
    108 ms elapsed real time, including 38 ms collecting
    97 ms elapsed user time, including 27 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    11248296 bytes allocated
running stats for peval (400):
    70 collections
    1771 ms elapsed cpu time, including 66 ms collecting
    1772 ms elapsed real time, including 67 ms collecting
    1762 ms elapsed user time, including 58 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    290635040 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-peval:
    3 collections
    108 ms elapsed cpu time, including 37 ms collecting
    108 ms elapsed real time, including 38 ms collecting
    97 ms elapsed user time, including 27 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    11248296 bytes allocated
running stats for peval (400):
    70 collections
    1771 ms elapsed cpu time, including 67 ms collecting
    1772 ms elapsed real time, including 67 ms collecting
    1762 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    290635040 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-peval:
    3 collections
    107 ms elapsed cpu time, including 37 ms collecting
    108 ms elapsed real time, including 37 ms collecting
    96 ms elapsed user time, including 27 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    11248296 bytes allocated
running stats for peval (400):
    70 collections
    1770 ms elapsed cpu time, including 66 ms collecting
    1772 ms elapsed real time, including 67 ms collecting
    1762 ms elapsed user time, including 58 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    290635040 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-peval:
    3 collections
    107 ms elapsed cpu time, including 37 ms collecting
    108 ms elapsed real time, including 38 ms collecting
    96 ms elapsed user time, including 27 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    11248296 bytes allocated
running stats for peval (400):
    70 collections
    1778 ms elapsed cpu time, including 67 ms collecting
    1780 ms elapsed real time, including 67 ms collecting
    1764 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    14 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    290635040 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-peval:
    3 collections
    107 ms elapsed cpu time, including 37 ms collecting
    108 ms elapsed real time, including 37 ms collecting
    96 ms elapsed user time, including 27 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    11248296 bytes allocated
running stats for peval (400):
    70 collections
    1771 ms elapsed cpu time, including 67 ms collecting
    1772 ms elapsed real time, including 67 ms collecting
    1762 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    290635040 bytes allocated
running pi
running stats for compile-pi:
    1 collection
    55 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    56 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4047944 bytes allocated
running stats for pi (3):
    92 collections
    523 ms elapsed cpu time, including 62 ms collecting
    524 ms elapsed real time, including 63 ms collecting
    517 ms elapsed user time, including 56 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    384915016 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-pi:
    1 collection
    55 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    57 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4047944 bytes allocated
running stats for pi (3):
    92 collections
    523 ms elapsed cpu time, including 62 ms collecting
    524 ms elapsed real time, including 63 ms collecting
    517 ms elapsed user time, including 56 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    384915016 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-pi:
    1 collection
    55 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    56 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4047944 bytes allocated
running stats for pi (3):
    92 collections
    524 ms elapsed cpu time, including 62 ms collecting
    525 ms elapsed real time, including 63 ms collecting
    518 ms elapsed user time, including 56 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    384915016 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-pi:
    1 collection
    55 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    56 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4047944 bytes allocated
running stats for pi (3):
    92 collections
    523 ms elapsed cpu time, including 62 ms collecting
    524 ms elapsed real time, including 63 ms collecting
    517 ms elapsed user time, including 56 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    384915016 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-pi:
    1 collection
    55 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    57 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4047944 bytes allocated
running stats for pi (3):
    92 collections
    523 ms elapsed cpu time, including 62 ms collecting
    524 ms elapsed real time, including 63 ms collecting
    517 ms elapsed user time, including 56 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    384915016 bytes allocated
running pnpoly
running stats for compile-pnpoly:
    1 collection
    52 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    53 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    42 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2907648 bytes allocated
running stats for pnpoly (140000):
    112 collections
    1322 ms elapsed cpu time, including 64 ms collecting
    1323 ms elapsed real time, including 64 ms collecting
    1316 ms elapsed user time, including 58 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    469296384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-pnpoly:
    1 collection
    52 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    53 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    42 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2907648 bytes allocated
running stats for pnpoly (140000):
    112 collections
    1322 ms elapsed cpu time, including 64 ms collecting
    1323 ms elapsed real time, including 64 ms collecting
    1316 ms elapsed user time, including 58 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    469296384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-pnpoly:
    1 collection
    52 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    53 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    42 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2907648 bytes allocated
running stats for pnpoly (140000):
    112 collections
    1323 ms elapsed cpu time, including 64 ms collecting
    1325 ms elapsed real time, including 64 ms collecting
    1317 ms elapsed user time, including 58 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    469296384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-pnpoly:
    1 collection
    52 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    52 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    42 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2907648 bytes allocated
running stats for pnpoly (140000):
    112 collections
    1323 ms elapsed cpu time, including 64 ms collecting
    1324 ms elapsed real time, including 64 ms collecting
    1317 ms elapsed user time, including 58 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    469296384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-pnpoly:
    1 collection
    52 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    52 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    42 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2907648 bytes allocated
running stats for pnpoly (140000):
    112 collections
    1322 ms elapsed cpu time, including 64 ms collecting
    1323 ms elapsed real time, including 64 ms collecting
    1316 ms elapsed user time, including 58 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    469296384 bytes allocated
running primes
running stats for compile-primes:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1852288 bytes allocated
running stats for primes (180000):
    158 collections
    1862 ms elapsed cpu time, including 69 ms collecting
    1863 ms elapsed real time, including 69 ms collecting
    1856 ms elapsed user time, including 63 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    663856384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-primes:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1852288 bytes allocated
running stats for primes (180000):
    158 collections
    1862 ms elapsed cpu time, including 69 ms collecting
    1863 ms elapsed real time, including 70 ms collecting
    1856 ms elapsed user time, including 63 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    663856384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-primes:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1852288 bytes allocated
running stats for primes (180000):
    158 collections
    1862 ms elapsed cpu time, including 69 ms collecting
    1863 ms elapsed real time, including 69 ms collecting
    1856 ms elapsed user time, including 63 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    663856384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-primes:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1852288 bytes allocated
running stats for primes (180000):
    158 collections
    1863 ms elapsed cpu time, including 69 ms collecting
    1865 ms elapsed real time, including 70 ms collecting
    1857 ms elapsed user time, including 63 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    663856384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-primes:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1852288 bytes allocated
running stats for primes (180000):
    158 collections
    1862 ms elapsed cpu time, including 69 ms collecting
    1864 ms elapsed real time, including 70 ms collecting
    1856 ms elapsed user time, including 63 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    663856384 bytes allocated
running puzzle
running stats for compile-puzzle:
    1 collection
    59 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4364416 bytes allocated
running stats for puzzle (180):
    22 collections
    1820 ms elapsed cpu time, including 41 ms collecting
    1822 ms elapsed real time, including 42 ms collecting
    1809 ms elapsed user time, including 36 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    90802672 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-puzzle:
    1 collection
    59 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    60 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4364416 bytes allocated
running stats for puzzle (180):
    22 collections
    1819 ms elapsed cpu time, including 41 ms collecting
    1820 ms elapsed real time, including 42 ms collecting
    1808 ms elapsed user time, including 36 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    90802672 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-puzzle:
    1 collection
    59 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    60 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4364416 bytes allocated
running stats for puzzle (180):
    22 collections
    1823 ms elapsed cpu time, including 41 ms collecting
    1825 ms elapsed real time, including 42 ms collecting
    1808 ms elapsed user time, including 36 ms collecting
    15 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    90802672 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-puzzle:
    1 collection
    59 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4364416 bytes allocated
running stats for puzzle (180):
    22 collections
    1819 ms elapsed cpu time, including 41 ms collecting
    1819 ms elapsed real time, including 41 ms collecting
    1808 ms elapsed user time, including 36 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    90802672 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-puzzle:
    1 collection
    59 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    60 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4364416 bytes allocated
running stats for puzzle (180):
    22 collections
    1819 ms elapsed cpu time, including 41 ms collecting
    1820 ms elapsed real time, including 42 ms collecting
    1808 ms elapsed user time, including 36 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    90802672 bytes allocated
running quicksort
running stats for compile-quicksort:
    1 collection
    53 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    54 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    43 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3012464 bytes allocated
running stats for quicksort30 (60):
    38 collections
    1589 ms elapsed cpu time, including 61 ms collecting
    1590 ms elapsed real time, including 61 ms collecting
    1576 ms elapsed user time, including 48 ms collecting
    13 ms elapsed sys time, including 13 ms collecting
    157367664 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-quicksort:
    1 collection
    52 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    53 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    42 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3012464 bytes allocated
running stats for quicksort30 (60):
    38 collections
    1590 ms elapsed cpu time, including 61 ms collecting
    1591 ms elapsed real time, including 61 ms collecting
    1577 ms elapsed user time, including 48 ms collecting
    13 ms elapsed sys time, including 13 ms collecting
    157367664 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-quicksort:
    1 collection
    52 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    53 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    42 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3012464 bytes allocated
running stats for quicksort30 (60):
    38 collections
    1589 ms elapsed cpu time, including 61 ms collecting
    1591 ms elapsed real time, including 61 ms collecting
    1576 ms elapsed user time, including 48 ms collecting
    13 ms elapsed sys time, including 13 ms collecting
    157367664 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-quicksort:
    1 collection
    52 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    53 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    42 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3012464 bytes allocated
running stats for quicksort30 (60):
    38 collections
    1590 ms elapsed cpu time, including 61 ms collecting
    1591 ms elapsed real time, including 61 ms collecting
    1577 ms elapsed user time, including 48 ms collecting
    13 ms elapsed sys time, including 13 ms collecting
    157367664 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-quicksort:
    1 collection
    52 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    53 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    42 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3012464 bytes allocated
running stats for quicksort30 (60):
    38 collections
    1589 ms elapsed cpu time, including 61 ms collecting
    1590 ms elapsed real time, including 61 ms collecting
    1576 ms elapsed user time, including 48 ms collecting
    13 ms elapsed sys time, including 13 ms collecting
    157367664 bytes allocated
running ray
running stats for compile-ray:
    2 collections
    68 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    69 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5391592 bytes allocated
running stats for ray (5):
    164 collections
    1294 ms elapsed cpu time, including 73 ms collecting
    1296 ms elapsed real time, including 74 ms collecting
    939 ms elapsed user time, including 65 ms collecting
    355 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    687672288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ray:
    2 collections
    68 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    69 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5391592 bytes allocated
running stats for ray (5):
    164 collections
    1291 ms elapsed cpu time, including 73 ms collecting
    1291 ms elapsed real time, including 74 ms collecting
    937 ms elapsed user time, including 65 ms collecting
    354 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    687672288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ray:
    2 collections
    68 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    69 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5391592 bytes allocated
running stats for ray (5):
    164 collections
    1294 ms elapsed cpu time, including 73 ms collecting
    1295 ms elapsed real time, including 74 ms collecting
    938 ms elapsed user time, including 65 ms collecting
    356 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    687672288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ray:
    2 collections
    68 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    69 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5391592 bytes allocated
running stats for ray (5):
    164 collections
    1293 ms elapsed cpu time, including 73 ms collecting
    1293 ms elapsed real time, including 74 ms collecting
    938 ms elapsed user time, including 65 ms collecting
    355 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    687672288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ray:
    2 collections
    68 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    69 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5391592 bytes allocated
running stats for ray (5):
    164 collections
    1297 ms elapsed cpu time, including 73 ms collecting
    1300 ms elapsed real time, including 74 ms collecting
    941 ms elapsed user time, including 65 ms collecting
    356 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    687672288 bytes allocated
running sboyer
running stats for compile-sboyer:
    2 collections
    70 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    70 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5392856 bytes allocated
running stats for sboyer0 (200):
    31 collections
    2314 ms elapsed cpu time, including 47 ms collecting
    2315 ms elapsed real time, including 47 ms collecting
    2308 ms elapsed user time, including 41 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    132330688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sboyer:
    2 collections
    70 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    70 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    5392856 bytes allocated
running stats for sboyer0 (200):
    31 collections
    2312 ms elapsed cpu time, including 45 ms collecting
    2314 ms elapsed real time, including 45 ms collecting
    2306 ms elapsed user time, including 39 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    132330688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sboyer:
    2 collections
    70 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    70 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5392856 bytes allocated
running stats for sboyer0 (200):
    31 collections
    2313 ms elapsed cpu time, including 45 ms collecting
    2313 ms elapsed real time, including 46 ms collecting
    2306 ms elapsed user time, including 39 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    132330688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sboyer:
    2 collections
    70 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    70 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    5392856 bytes allocated
running stats for sboyer0 (200):
    31 collections
    2315 ms elapsed cpu time, including 45 ms collecting
    2316 ms elapsed real time, including 45 ms collecting
    2307 ms elapsed user time, including 39 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    132330688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sboyer:
    2 collections
    70 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    70 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5392856 bytes allocated
running stats for sboyer0 (200):
    31 collections
    2312 ms elapsed cpu time, including 45 ms collecting
    2313 ms elapsed real time, including 46 ms collecting
    2306 ms elapsed user time, including 39 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    132330688 bytes allocated
running scheme
running stats for compile-scheme:
    4 collections
    170 ms elapsed cpu time, including 72 ms collecting
    170 ms elapsed real time, including 72 ms collecting
    150 ms elapsed user time, including 52 ms collecting
    20 ms elapsed sys time, including 20 ms collecting
    16099120 bytes allocated
running stats for scheme (40000):
    44 collections
    1696 ms elapsed cpu time, including 22 ms collecting
    1697 ms elapsed real time, including 22 ms collecting
    1696 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    184960000 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-scheme:
    4 collections
    169 ms elapsed cpu time, including 71 ms collecting
    170 ms elapsed real time, including 71 ms collecting
    149 ms elapsed user time, including 51 ms collecting
    20 ms elapsed sys time, including 20 ms collecting
    16099120 bytes allocated
running stats for scheme (40000):
    44 collections
    1701 ms elapsed cpu time, including 22 ms collecting
    1711 ms elapsed real time, including 22 ms collecting
    1699 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    2 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    184960000 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-scheme:
    4 collections
    169 ms elapsed cpu time, including 71 ms collecting
    170 ms elapsed real time, including 71 ms collecting
    149 ms elapsed user time, including 51 ms collecting
    20 ms elapsed sys time, including 20 ms collecting
    16099120 bytes allocated
running stats for scheme (40000):
    44 collections
    1697 ms elapsed cpu time, including 22 ms collecting
    1699 ms elapsed real time, including 22 ms collecting
    1697 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    184960000 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-scheme:
    4 collections
    169 ms elapsed cpu time, including 71 ms collecting
    170 ms elapsed real time, including 71 ms collecting
    149 ms elapsed user time, including 51 ms collecting
    20 ms elapsed sys time, including 20 ms collecting
    16099120 bytes allocated
running stats for scheme (40000):
    44 collections
    1695 ms elapsed cpu time, including 22 ms collecting
    1697 ms elapsed real time, including 22 ms collecting
    1695 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    184960000 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-scheme:
    4 collections
    169 ms elapsed cpu time, including 71 ms collecting
    170 ms elapsed real time, including 72 ms collecting
    149 ms elapsed user time, including 51 ms collecting
    20 ms elapsed sys time, including 20 ms collecting
    16099120 bytes allocated
running stats for scheme (40000):
    44 collections
    1697 ms elapsed cpu time, including 22 ms collecting
    1699 ms elapsed real time, including 22 ms collecting
    1697 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    184960000 bytes allocated
running simplex
running stats for compile-simplex:
    2 collections
    87 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    87 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    76 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8096704 bytes allocated
running stats for simplex (160000):
    200 collections
    1526 ms elapsed cpu time, including 78 ms collecting
    1528 ms elapsed real time, including 79 ms collecting
    1518 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    834572288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-simplex:
    2 collections
    86 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    87 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    75 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8096704 bytes allocated
running stats for simplex (160000):
    200 collections
    1526 ms elapsed cpu time, including 78 ms collecting
    1526 ms elapsed real time, including 79 ms collecting
    1518 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    834572288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-simplex:
    2 collections
    86 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    87 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    76 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8096704 bytes allocated
running stats for simplex (160000):
    200 collections
    1526 ms elapsed cpu time, including 78 ms collecting
    1527 ms elapsed real time, including 79 ms collecting
    1518 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    834572288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-simplex:
    2 collections
    87 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    87 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    76 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8096704 bytes allocated
running stats for simplex (160000):
    200 collections
    1526 ms elapsed cpu time, including 78 ms collecting
    1528 ms elapsed real time, including 79 ms collecting
    1518 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    834572288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-simplex:
    2 collections
    87 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    87 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    76 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8096704 bytes allocated
running stats for simplex (160000):
    200 collections
    1525 ms elapsed cpu time, including 78 ms collecting
    1526 ms elapsed real time, including 79 ms collecting
    1517 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    834572288 bytes allocated
running slatex
running stats for compile-slatex:
    7 collections
    288 ms elapsed cpu time, including 90 ms collecting
    288 ms elapsed real time, including 91 ms collecting
    269 ms elapsed user time, including 72 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 18 ms collecting
    28021136 bytes allocated
running stats for slatex (30):
    29 collections
    2482 ms elapsed cpu time, including 479 ms collecting
    3479 ms elapsed real time, including 480 ms collecting
    837 ms elapsed user time, including 163 ms collecting
    1645 ms elapsed sys time, including 316 ms collecting
    121262504 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-slatex:
    7 collections
    288 ms elapsed cpu time, including 90 ms collecting
    289 ms elapsed real time, including 91 ms collecting
    269 ms elapsed user time, including 72 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 18 ms collecting
    28021136 bytes allocated
running stats for slatex (30):
    29 collections
    2344 ms elapsed cpu time, including 474 ms collecting
    3708 ms elapsed real time, including 475 ms collecting
    858 ms elapsed user time, including 167 ms collecting
    1486 ms elapsed sys time, including 307 ms collecting
    121262504 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-slatex:
    7 collections
    286 ms elapsed cpu time, including 89 ms collecting
    286 ms elapsed real time, including 89 ms collecting
    267 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 18 ms collecting
    28021136 bytes allocated
running stats for slatex (30):
    29 collections
    2306 ms elapsed cpu time, including 473 ms collecting
    4059 ms elapsed real time, including 475 ms collecting
    850 ms elapsed user time, including 164 ms collecting
    1456 ms elapsed sys time, including 309 ms collecting
    121262504 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-slatex:
    7 collections
    286 ms elapsed cpu time, including 88 ms collecting
    286 ms elapsed real time, including 89 ms collecting
    267 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 18 ms collecting
    28021136 bytes allocated
running stats for slatex (30):
    29 collections
    2327 ms elapsed cpu time, including 475 ms collecting
    3933 ms elapsed real time, including 476 ms collecting
    856 ms elapsed user time, including 167 ms collecting
    1471 ms elapsed sys time, including 308 ms collecting
    121262504 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-slatex:
    7 collections
    288 ms elapsed cpu time, including 90 ms collecting
    289 ms elapsed real time, including 90 ms collecting
    269 ms elapsed user time, including 72 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 18 ms collecting
    28021136 bytes allocated
running stats for slatex (30):
    29 collections
    2334 ms elapsed cpu time, including 480 ms collecting
    3904 ms elapsed real time, including 480 ms collecting
    858 ms elapsed user time, including 168 ms collecting
    1476 ms elapsed sys time, including 312 ms collecting
    121262504 bytes allocated
running string
running stats for compile-string:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1874352 bytes allocated
running stats for string (4):
    159 collections
    2182 ms elapsed cpu time, including 1373 ms collecting
    2183 ms elapsed real time, including 1375 ms collecting
    1452 ms elapsed user time, including 644 ms collecting
    730 ms elapsed sys time, including 729 ms collecting
    503288704 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-string:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1874352 bytes allocated
running stats for string (4):
    159 collections
    2183 ms elapsed cpu time, including 1374 ms collecting
    2184 ms elapsed real time, including 1376 ms collecting
    1452 ms elapsed user time, including 644 ms collecting
    731 ms elapsed sys time, including 730 ms collecting
    503288704 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-string:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1874352 bytes allocated
running stats for string (4):
    159 collections
    2182 ms elapsed cpu time, including 1373 ms collecting
    2183 ms elapsed real time, including 1374 ms collecting
    1451 ms elapsed user time, including 643 ms collecting
    731 ms elapsed sys time, including 730 ms collecting
    503288704 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-string:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1874352 bytes allocated
running stats for string (4):
    159 collections
    2180 ms elapsed cpu time, including 1371 ms collecting
    2180 ms elapsed real time, including 1373 ms collecting
    1452 ms elapsed user time, including 644 ms collecting
    728 ms elapsed sys time, including 727 ms collecting
    503288704 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-string:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1874352 bytes allocated
running stats for string (4):
    159 collections
    2186 ms elapsed cpu time, including 1377 ms collecting
    2187 ms elapsed real time, including 1379 ms collecting
    1453 ms elapsed user time, including 645 ms collecting
    733 ms elapsed sys time, including 732 ms collecting
    503288704 bytes allocated
running sum
running stats for compile-sum:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1620888 bytes allocated
running stats for sum (30000):
    no collections
    1805 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1806 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1805 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sum:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1620888 bytes allocated
running stats for sum (30000):
    no collections
    1805 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1806 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1805 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sum:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1620888 bytes allocated
running stats for sum (30000):
    no collections
    1815 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1819 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1815 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sum:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1620888 bytes allocated
running stats for sum (30000):
    no collections
    1840 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1849 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1839 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sum:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1620888 bytes allocated
running stats for sum (30000):
    no collections
    1924 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1929 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1922 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    2 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running sum1
running stats for compile-sum1:
    1 collection
    50 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    52 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    1741392 bytes allocated
running stats for sum1 (5):
    89 collections
    2497 ms elapsed cpu time, including 69 ms collecting
    2503 ms elapsed real time, including 70 ms collecting
    2478 ms elapsed user time, including 62 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    373935624 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sum1:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1741392 bytes allocated
running stats for sum1 (5):
    89 collections
    2516 ms elapsed cpu time, including 69 ms collecting
    2526 ms elapsed real time, including 70 ms collecting
    2494 ms elapsed user time, including 62 ms collecting
    22 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    373935624 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sum1:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1741392 bytes allocated
running stats for sum1 (5):
    89 collections
    2498 ms elapsed cpu time, including 69 ms collecting
    2507 ms elapsed real time, including 70 ms collecting
    2478 ms elapsed user time, including 62 ms collecting
    20 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    373935624 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sum1:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1741392 bytes allocated
running stats for sum1 (5):
    89 collections
    2437 ms elapsed cpu time, including 68 ms collecting
    2444 ms elapsed real time, including 68 ms collecting
    2418 ms elapsed user time, including 61 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    373935624 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sum1:
    1 collection
    51 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    52 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    40 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    1741392 bytes allocated
running stats for sum1 (5):
    89 collections
    2508 ms elapsed cpu time, including 69 ms collecting
    2516 ms elapsed real time, including 69 ms collecting
    2488 ms elapsed user time, including 62 ms collecting
    20 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    373935624 bytes allocated
running sumfp
running stats for compile-sumfp:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1652824 bytes allocated
running stats for sumfp (8000):
    611 collections
    1287 ms elapsed cpu time, including 153 ms collecting
    1288 ms elapsed real time, including 155 ms collecting
    1277 ms elapsed user time, including 145 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    2560272384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumfp:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1652824 bytes allocated
running stats for sumfp (8000):
    611 collections
    1226 ms elapsed cpu time, including 144 ms collecting
    1227 ms elapsed real time, including 146 ms collecting
    1217 ms elapsed user time, including 136 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    2560272384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumfp:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1652824 bytes allocated
running stats for sumfp (8000):
    611 collections
    1200 ms elapsed cpu time, including 144 ms collecting
    1201 ms elapsed real time, including 147 ms collecting
    1191 ms elapsed user time, including 137 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    2560272384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumfp:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1652824 bytes allocated
running stats for sumfp (8000):
    611 collections
    1218 ms elapsed cpu time, including 145 ms collecting
    1219 ms elapsed real time, including 147 ms collecting
    1209 ms elapsed user time, including 137 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    2560272384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumfp:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1652824 bytes allocated
running stats for sumfp (8000):
    611 collections
    1173 ms elapsed cpu time, including 142 ms collecting
    1174 ms elapsed real time, including 144 ms collecting
    1164 ms elapsed user time, including 135 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    2560272384 bytes allocated
running sumloop
running stats for compile-sumloop:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1759128 bytes allocated
running stats for sumloop (2):
    no collections
    1203 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1203 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1203 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumloop:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1759128 bytes allocated
running stats for sumloop (2):
    no collections
    1203 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1203 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1203 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumloop:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1759128 bytes allocated
running stats for sumloop (2):
    no collections
    1203 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1203 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1203 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumloop:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1759128 bytes allocated
running stats for sumloop (2):
    no collections
    1203 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1203 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1203 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumloop:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1759128 bytes allocated
running stats for sumloop (2):
    no collections
    1207 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1208 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1203 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    4 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running sumloop2
running stats for compile-sumloop2:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1666144 bytes allocated
running stats for sumloop (2):
    no collections
    1552 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1552 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1552 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    48 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumloop2:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1666144 bytes allocated
running stats for sumloop (2):
    no collections
    1552 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1553 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1552 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    48 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumloop2:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1666144 bytes allocated
running stats for sumloop (2):
    no collections
    1552 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1553 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1552 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    48 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumloop2:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1666144 bytes allocated
running stats for sumloop (2):
    no collections
    1551 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1551 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1551 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    48 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumloop2:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1666144 bytes allocated
running stats for sumloop (2):
    no collections
    1551 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1552 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1551 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    48 bytes allocated
running tail
running stats for compile-tail:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1832384 bytes allocated
running stats for tail (4):
    86 collections
    1709 ms elapsed cpu time, including 420 ms collecting
    2284 ms elapsed real time, including 421 ms collecting
    1466 ms elapsed user time, including 264 ms collecting
    243 ms elapsed sys time, including 156 ms collecting
    361745056 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-tail:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1832384 bytes allocated
running stats for tail (4):
    86 collections
    1710 ms elapsed cpu time, including 421 ms collecting
    1832 ms elapsed real time, including 423 ms collecting
    1468 ms elapsed user time, including 265 ms collecting
    242 ms elapsed sys time, including 156 ms collecting
    361745056 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-tail:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1832384 bytes allocated
running stats for tail (4):
    86 collections
    1711 ms elapsed cpu time, including 422 ms collecting
    1831 ms elapsed real time, including 423 ms collecting
    1469 ms elapsed user time, including 266 ms collecting
    242 ms elapsed sys time, including 156 ms collecting
    361745056 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-tail:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1832384 bytes allocated
running stats for tail (4):
    86 collections
    1712 ms elapsed cpu time, including 424 ms collecting
    1833 ms elapsed real time, including 425 ms collecting
    1469 ms elapsed user time, including 267 ms collecting
    243 ms elapsed sys time, including 157 ms collecting
    361745056 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-tail:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1832384 bytes allocated
running stats for tail (4):
    86 collections
    1709 ms elapsed cpu time, including 421 ms collecting
    1830 ms elapsed real time, including 422 ms collecting
    1467 ms elapsed user time, including 265 ms collecting
    242 ms elapsed sys time, including 156 ms collecting
    361745056 bytes allocated
running tak
running stats for compile-tak:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1661104 bytes allocated
running stats for tak (3000):
    no collections
    1932 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1932 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1932 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-tak:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1661104 bytes allocated
running stats for tak (3000):
    no collections
    1932 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1932 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1932 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-tak:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1661104 bytes allocated
running stats for tak (3000):
    no collections
    1932 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1933 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1932 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-tak:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1661104 bytes allocated
running stats for tak (3000):
    no collections
    1931 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1932 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1931 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-tak:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1661104 bytes allocated
running stats for tak (3000):
    no collections
    1937 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1938 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1932 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    5 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running takl
running stats for compile-takl:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1853992 bytes allocated
running stats for takl (500):
    no collections
    1886 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1887 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1886 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-takl:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1853992 bytes allocated
running stats for takl (500):
    no collections
    1886 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1887 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1886 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-takl:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1853992 bytes allocated
running stats for takl (500):
    no collections
    1886 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1887 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1886 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-takl:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1853992 bytes allocated
running stats for takl (500):
    no collections
    1886 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1887 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1886 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-takl:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1853992 bytes allocated
running stats for takl (500):
    no collections
    1886 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1887 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1886 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running trav1
running stats for compile-trav1:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4191592 bytes allocated
running stats for trav1 (150):
    46 collections
    1541 ms elapsed cpu time, including 148 ms collecting
    1542 ms elapsed real time, including 149 ms collecting
    1529 ms elapsed user time, including 137 ms collecting
    12 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    191965208 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-trav1:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4191592 bytes allocated
running stats for trav1 (150):
    46 collections
    1540 ms elapsed cpu time, including 148 ms collecting
    1541 ms elapsed real time, including 149 ms collecting
    1529 ms elapsed user time, including 137 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    191965208 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-trav1:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4191592 bytes allocated
running stats for trav1 (150):
    46 collections
    1538 ms elapsed cpu time, including 147 ms collecting
    1539 ms elapsed real time, including 148 ms collecting
    1527 ms elapsed user time, including 136 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    191965208 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-trav1:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4191592 bytes allocated
running stats for trav1 (150):
    46 collections
    1539 ms elapsed cpu time, including 148 ms collecting
    1541 ms elapsed real time, including 149 ms collecting
    1528 ms elapsed user time, including 137 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    191965208 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-trav1:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4191592 bytes allocated
running stats for trav1 (150):
    46 collections
    1538 ms elapsed cpu time, including 147 ms collecting
    1540 ms elapsed real time, including 147 ms collecting
    1527 ms elapsed user time, including 136 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    191965208 bytes allocated
running trav2
running stats for compile-trav2:
    2 collections
    69 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    70 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5515624 bytes allocated
running stats for trav2 (40):
    no collections
    1857 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1858 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1857 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-trav2:
    2 collections
    70 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    70 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5515624 bytes allocated
running stats for trav2 (40):
    no collections
    1857 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1858 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1857 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-trav2:
    2 collections
    70 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    70 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5515624 bytes allocated
running stats for trav2 (40):
    no collections
    1857 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1858 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1857 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-trav2:
    2 collections
    70 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    70 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5515624 bytes allocated
running stats for trav2 (40):
    no collections
    1857 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1858 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1857 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-trav2:
    2 collections
    70 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    70 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5515624 bytes allocated
running stats for trav2 (40):
    no collections
    1857 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1858 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1857 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running triangl
running stats for compile-triangl:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2325240 bytes allocated
running stats for triangl (12):
    no collections
    1723 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1725 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1720 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    3 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    1116000 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-triangl:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2325240 bytes allocated
running stats for triangl (12):
    no collections
    1720 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1720 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1720 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    1116000 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-triangl:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2325240 bytes allocated
running stats for triangl (12):
    no collections
    1720 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1721 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1720 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    1116000 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-triangl:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2325240 bytes allocated
running stats for triangl (12):
    no collections
    1720 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1720 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1720 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    1116000 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-triangl:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2325240 bytes allocated
running stats for triangl (12):
    no collections
    1720 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1720 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1720 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    1116000 bytes allocated
running wc
running stats for compile-wc:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1864544 bytes allocated
running stats for wc (15):
    no collections
    1747 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1749 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1702 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    250440 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-wc:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1864544 bytes allocated
running stats for wc (15):
    no collections
    1747 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1748 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1702 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    250440 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-wc:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1864544 bytes allocated
running stats for wc (15):
    no collections
    1747 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1749 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1702 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    250440 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-wc:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1864544 bytes allocated
running stats for wc (15):
    no collections
    1747 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1748 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1702 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    250440 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-wc:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1864544 bytes allocated
running stats for wc (15):
    no collections
    1747 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1748 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1702 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    250440 bytes allocated
NOW: 2008-06-29 22:40:53    -O2
running ack
running stats for compile-ack:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1664512 bytes allocated
running stats for ack (20):
    no collections
    1330 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1333 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1330 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ack:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1664512 bytes allocated
running stats for ack (20):
    no collections
    1330 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1330 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1330 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ack:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1664512 bytes allocated
running stats for ack (20):
    no collections
    1331 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1332 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1330 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ack:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1664512 bytes allocated
running stats for ack (20):
    no collections
    1330 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1332 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1330 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ack:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1664512 bytes allocated
running stats for ack (20):
    no collections
    1330 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1330 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1330 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running array1
running stats for compile-array1:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2020280 bytes allocated
running stats for array1 (2):
    80 collections
    1199 ms elapsed cpu time, including 226 ms collecting
    1202 ms elapsed real time, including 227 ms collecting
    1124 ms elapsed user time, including 153 ms collecting
    75 ms elapsed sys time, including 73 ms collecting
    320025984 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-array1:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2020280 bytes allocated
running stats for array1 (2):
    80 collections
    1201 ms elapsed cpu time, including 225 ms collecting
    1219 ms elapsed real time, including 227 ms collecting
    1126 ms elapsed user time, including 153 ms collecting
    75 ms elapsed sys time, including 72 ms collecting
    320025984 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-array1:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2020280 bytes allocated
running stats for array1 (2):
    80 collections
    1197 ms elapsed cpu time, including 225 ms collecting
    1202 ms elapsed real time, including 226 ms collecting
    1124 ms elapsed user time, including 153 ms collecting
    73 ms elapsed sys time, including 72 ms collecting
    320025984 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-array1:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2020280 bytes allocated
running stats for array1 (2):
    80 collections
    1194 ms elapsed cpu time, including 224 ms collecting
    1195 ms elapsed real time, including 225 ms collecting
    1121 ms elapsed user time, including 152 ms collecting
    73 ms elapsed sys time, including 72 ms collecting
    320025984 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-array1:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2020280 bytes allocated
running stats for array1 (2):
    80 collections
    1195 ms elapsed cpu time, including 225 ms collecting
    1195 ms elapsed real time, including 226 ms collecting
    1121 ms elapsed user time, including 152 ms collecting
    74 ms elapsed sys time, including 73 ms collecting
    320025984 bytes allocated
running bibfreq
running stats for compile-bibfreq:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2112696 bytes allocated
running stats for bibfreq (2):
    34 collections
    2836 ms elapsed cpu time, including 76 ms collecting
    2852 ms elapsed real time, including 76 ms collecting
    2813 ms elapsed user time, including 67 ms collecting
    23 ms elapsed sys time, including 9 ms collecting
    144979456 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-bibfreq:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2112696 bytes allocated
running stats for bibfreq (2):
    34 collections
    2832 ms elapsed cpu time, including 75 ms collecting
    2841 ms elapsed real time, including 76 ms collecting
    2810 ms elapsed user time, including 66 ms collecting
    22 ms elapsed sys time, including 9 ms collecting
    144979456 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-bibfreq:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2112696 bytes allocated
running stats for bibfreq (2):
    34 collections
    2827 ms elapsed cpu time, including 75 ms collecting
    2829 ms elapsed real time, including 76 ms collecting
    2806 ms elapsed user time, including 66 ms collecting
    21 ms elapsed sys time, including 9 ms collecting
    144979456 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-bibfreq:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2112696 bytes allocated
running stats for bibfreq (2):
    34 collections
    2829 ms elapsed cpu time, including 75 ms collecting
    2831 ms elapsed real time, including 76 ms collecting
    2807 ms elapsed user time, including 66 ms collecting
    22 ms elapsed sys time, including 9 ms collecting
    144979456 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-bibfreq:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2112696 bytes allocated
running stats for bibfreq (2):
    34 collections
    2829 ms elapsed cpu time, including 75 ms collecting
    2830 ms elapsed real time, including 76 ms collecting
    2807 ms elapsed user time, including 66 ms collecting
    22 ms elapsed sys time, including 9 ms collecting
    144979456 bytes allocated
running boyer
running stats for compile-boyer:
    2 collections
    60 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    61 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4561952 bytes allocated
running stats for boyer (50):
    21 collections
    1788 ms elapsed cpu time, including 64 ms collecting
    1789 ms elapsed real time, including 64 ms collecting
    1780 ms elapsed user time, including 57 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    90597888 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-boyer:
    2 collections
    61 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    62 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4561952 bytes allocated
running stats for boyer (50):
    21 collections
    1793 ms elapsed cpu time, including 64 ms collecting
    1795 ms elapsed real time, including 64 ms collecting
    1785 ms elapsed user time, including 57 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    90597888 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-boyer:
    2 collections
    61 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    62 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4561952 bytes allocated
running stats for boyer (50):
    21 collections
    1798 ms elapsed cpu time, including 63 ms collecting
    1800 ms elapsed real time, including 64 ms collecting
    1787 ms elapsed user time, including 56 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    90597888 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-boyer:
    2 collections
    61 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    62 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4561952 bytes allocated
running stats for boyer (50):
    21 collections
    1789 ms elapsed cpu time, including 64 ms collecting
    1790 ms elapsed real time, including 64 ms collecting
    1781 ms elapsed user time, including 57 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    90597888 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-boyer:
    2 collections
    61 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    62 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4561952 bytes allocated
running stats for boyer (50):
    21 collections
    1787 ms elapsed cpu time, including 64 ms collecting
    1787 ms elapsed real time, including 64 ms collecting
    1779 ms elapsed user time, including 57 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    90597888 bytes allocated
running browse
running stats for compile-browse:
    2 collections
    60 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    61 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4552904 bytes allocated
running stats for browse (600):
    110 collections
    1874 ms elapsed cpu time, including 65 ms collecting
    1876 ms elapsed real time, including 65 ms collecting
    1868 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    464172288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-browse:
    2 collections
    60 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    61 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4552904 bytes allocated
running stats for browse (600):
    110 collections
    1875 ms elapsed cpu time, including 65 ms collecting
    1877 ms elapsed real time, including 65 ms collecting
    1869 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    464172288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-browse:
    2 collections
    60 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    61 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4552904 bytes allocated
running stats for browse (600):
    110 collections
    1874 ms elapsed cpu time, including 65 ms collecting
    1876 ms elapsed real time, including 66 ms collecting
    1868 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    464172288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-browse:
    2 collections
    60 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    61 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4552904 bytes allocated
running stats for browse (600):
    110 collections
    1875 ms elapsed cpu time, including 65 ms collecting
    1877 ms elapsed real time, including 65 ms collecting
    1869 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    464172288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-browse:
    2 collections
    60 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    61 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4552904 bytes allocated
running stats for browse (600):
    110 collections
    1875 ms elapsed cpu time, including 65 ms collecting
    1877 ms elapsed real time, including 65 ms collecting
    1869 ms elapsed user time, including 59 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    464172288 bytes allocated
running cat
running stats for compile-cat:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1675640 bytes allocated
running stats for cat (12):
    no collections
    1724 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    2483 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1512 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    212 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    398208 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-cat:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1675640 bytes allocated
running stats for cat (12):
    no collections
    1726 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    2178 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1514 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    212 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    398208 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-cat:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1675640 bytes allocated
running stats for cat (12):
    no collections
    1727 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    2177 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1515 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    212 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    398208 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-cat:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1675640 bytes allocated
running stats for cat (12):
    no collections
    1726 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    2177 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1513 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    213 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    398208 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-cat:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1675640 bytes allocated
running stats for cat (12):
    no collections
    1728 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    2187 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1517 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    211 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    398208 bytes allocated
running compiler
running stats for compile-compiler:
    55 collections
    3373 ms elapsed cpu time, including 891 ms collecting
    3375 ms elapsed real time, including 891 ms collecting
    3262 ms elapsed user time, including 800 ms collecting
    111 ms elapsed sys time, including 91 ms collecting
    226840208 bytes allocated
running stats for compiler (500):
    75 collections
    1546 ms elapsed cpu time, including 147 ms collecting
    1548 ms elapsed real time, including 148 ms collecting
    1503 ms elapsed user time, including 104 ms collecting
    43 ms elapsed sys time, including 43 ms collecting
    313484016 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-compiler:
    55 collections
    3373 ms elapsed cpu time, including 891 ms collecting
    3374 ms elapsed real time, including 892 ms collecting
    3265 ms elapsed user time, including 800 ms collecting
    108 ms elapsed sys time, including 91 ms collecting
    226840208 bytes allocated
running stats for compiler (500):
    75 collections
    1546 ms elapsed cpu time, including 146 ms collecting
    1548 ms elapsed real time, including 148 ms collecting
    1503 ms elapsed user time, including 104 ms collecting
    43 ms elapsed sys time, including 42 ms collecting
    313484016 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-compiler:
    55 collections
    3370 ms elapsed cpu time, including 891 ms collecting
    3370 ms elapsed real time, including 892 ms collecting
    3262 ms elapsed user time, including 800 ms collecting
    108 ms elapsed sys time, including 91 ms collecting
    226840208 bytes allocated
running stats for compiler (500):
    75 collections
    1547 ms elapsed cpu time, including 147 ms collecting
    1548 ms elapsed real time, including 149 ms collecting
    1503 ms elapsed user time, including 104 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed sys time, including 43 ms collecting
    313484016 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-compiler:
    55 collections
    3369 ms elapsed cpu time, including 890 ms collecting
    3370 ms elapsed real time, including 891 ms collecting
    3261 ms elapsed user time, including 800 ms collecting
    108 ms elapsed sys time, including 90 ms collecting
    226840208 bytes allocated
running stats for compiler (500):
    75 collections
    1547 ms elapsed cpu time, including 147 ms collecting
    1549 ms elapsed real time, including 149 ms collecting
    1504 ms elapsed user time, including 104 ms collecting
    43 ms elapsed sys time, including 43 ms collecting
    313484016 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-compiler:
    55 collections
    3369 ms elapsed cpu time, including 891 ms collecting
    3370 ms elapsed real time, including 891 ms collecting
    3261 ms elapsed user time, including 800 ms collecting
    108 ms elapsed sys time, including 91 ms collecting
    226840208 bytes allocated
running stats for compiler (500):
    75 collections
    1545 ms elapsed cpu time, including 147 ms collecting
    1547 ms elapsed real time, including 148 ms collecting
    1502 ms elapsed user time, including 104 ms collecting
    43 ms elapsed sys time, including 43 ms collecting
    313484016 bytes allocated
running conform
running stats for compile-conform:
    3 collections
    86 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    87 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    76 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    9165552 bytes allocated
running stats for conform (70):
    30 collections
    1288 ms elapsed cpu time, including 52 ms collecting
    1288 ms elapsed real time, including 52 ms collecting
    1281 ms elapsed user time, including 45 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    125539648 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-conform:
    3 collections
    86 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    87 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    76 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    9165552 bytes allocated
running stats for conform (70):
    30 collections
    1288 ms elapsed cpu time, including 52 ms collecting
    1290 ms elapsed real time, including 52 ms collecting
    1280 ms elapsed user time, including 45 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    125539648 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-conform:
    3 collections
    86 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    87 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    76 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    9165552 bytes allocated
running stats for conform (70):
    30 collections
    1287 ms elapsed cpu time, including 52 ms collecting
    1288 ms elapsed real time, including 52 ms collecting
    1280 ms elapsed user time, including 45 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    125539648 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-conform:
    3 collections
    86 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    87 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    76 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    9165552 bytes allocated
running stats for conform (70):
    30 collections
    1289 ms elapsed cpu time, including 52 ms collecting
    1290 ms elapsed real time, including 52 ms collecting
    1281 ms elapsed user time, including 45 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    125539648 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-conform:
    3 collections
    86 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    87 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    76 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    9165552 bytes allocated
running stats for conform (70):
    30 collections
    1295 ms elapsed cpu time, including 52 ms collecting
    1296 ms elapsed real time, including 52 ms collecting
    1282 ms elapsed user time, including 45 ms collecting
    13 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    125539648 bytes allocated
running cpstak
running stats for compile-cpstak:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1801888 bytes allocated
running stats for cpstak (1700):
    413 collections
    1916 ms elapsed cpu time, including 109 ms collecting
    1917 ms elapsed real time, including 112 ms collecting
    1908 ms elapsed user time, including 103 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    1730153984 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-cpstak:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1801888 bytes allocated
running stats for cpstak (1700):
    413 collections
    1918 ms elapsed cpu time, including 111 ms collecting
    1919 ms elapsed real time, including 112 ms collecting
    1910 ms elapsed user time, including 104 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1730153984 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-cpstak:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1801888 bytes allocated
running stats for cpstak (1700):
    413 collections
    1929 ms elapsed cpu time, including 111 ms collecting
    1939 ms elapsed real time, including 115 ms collecting
    1919 ms elapsed user time, including 104 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1730153984 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-cpstak:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1801888 bytes allocated
running stats for cpstak (1700):
    413 collections
    1928 ms elapsed cpu time, including 111 ms collecting
    1930 ms elapsed real time, including 113 ms collecting
    1917 ms elapsed user time, including 104 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1730153984 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-cpstak:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1801888 bytes allocated
running stats for cpstak (1700):
    413 collections
    1928 ms elapsed cpu time, including 111 ms collecting
    1931 ms elapsed real time, including 113 ms collecting
    1917 ms elapsed user time, including 104 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1730153984 bytes allocated
running ctak
running stats for compile-ctak:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1881288 bytes allocated
running stats for ctak (160):
    165 collections
    1799 ms elapsed cpu time, including 272 ms collecting
    1801 ms elapsed real time, including 273 ms collecting
    1444 ms elapsed user time, including 117 ms collecting
    355 ms elapsed sys time, including 155 ms collecting
    692083568 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ctak:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1881288 bytes allocated
running stats for ctak (160):
    165 collections
    1800 ms elapsed cpu time, including 272 ms collecting
    1803 ms elapsed real time, including 274 ms collecting
    1444 ms elapsed user time, including 117 ms collecting
    356 ms elapsed sys time, including 155 ms collecting
    692083568 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ctak:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1881288 bytes allocated
running stats for ctak (160):
    165 collections
    1798 ms elapsed cpu time, including 271 ms collecting
    1801 ms elapsed real time, including 272 ms collecting
    1444 ms elapsed user time, including 117 ms collecting
    354 ms elapsed sys time, including 154 ms collecting
    692083568 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ctak:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1881288 bytes allocated
running stats for ctak (160):
    165 collections
    1799 ms elapsed cpu time, including 272 ms collecting
    1801 ms elapsed real time, including 274 ms collecting
    1444 ms elapsed user time, including 117 ms collecting
    355 ms elapsed sys time, including 155 ms collecting
    692083568 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ctak:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1881288 bytes allocated
running stats for ctak (160):
    165 collections
    1798 ms elapsed cpu time, including 272 ms collecting
    1800 ms elapsed real time, including 273 ms collecting
    1444 ms elapsed user time, including 117 ms collecting
    354 ms elapsed sys time, including 155 ms collecting
    692083568 bytes allocated
running dderiv
running stats for compile-dderiv:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2531608 bytes allocated
running stats for dderiv (3000000):
    281 collections
    1866 ms elapsed cpu time, including 97 ms collecting
    1868 ms elapsed real time, including 98 ms collecting
    1856 ms elapsed user time, including 90 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1176016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-dderiv:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2531608 bytes allocated
running stats for dderiv (3000000):
    281 collections
    1865 ms elapsed cpu time, including 97 ms collecting
    1867 ms elapsed real time, including 98 ms collecting
    1855 ms elapsed user time, including 90 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1176016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-dderiv:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2531608 bytes allocated
running stats for dderiv (3000000):
    281 collections
    1873 ms elapsed cpu time, including 98 ms collecting
    1875 ms elapsed real time, including 99 ms collecting
    1863 ms elapsed user time, including 91 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1176016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-dderiv:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2531608 bytes allocated
running stats for dderiv (3000000):
    281 collections
    1868 ms elapsed cpu time, including 98 ms collecting
    1871 ms elapsed real time, including 99 ms collecting
    1858 ms elapsed user time, including 91 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1176016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-dderiv:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2531608 bytes allocated
running stats for dderiv (3000000):
    281 collections
    1870 ms elapsed cpu time, including 95 ms collecting
    1873 ms elapsed real time, including 97 ms collecting
    1858 ms elapsed user time, including 89 ms collecting
    12 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    1176016384 bytes allocated
running deriv
running stats for compile-deriv:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2020304 bytes allocated
running stats for deriv (4000000):
    374 collections
    1733 ms elapsed cpu time, including 107 ms collecting
    1744 ms elapsed real time, including 110 ms collecting
    1722 ms elapsed user time, including 100 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1568016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-deriv:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2020304 bytes allocated
running stats for deriv (4000000):
    374 collections
    1733 ms elapsed cpu time, including 107 ms collecting
    1735 ms elapsed real time, including 109 ms collecting
    1723 ms elapsed user time, including 100 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1568016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-deriv:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2020304 bytes allocated
running stats for deriv (4000000):
    374 collections
    1728 ms elapsed cpu time, including 106 ms collecting
    1731 ms elapsed real time, including 108 ms collecting
    1718 ms elapsed user time, including 99 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1568016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-deriv:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2020304 bytes allocated
running stats for deriv (4000000):
    374 collections
    1729 ms elapsed cpu time, including 106 ms collecting
    1733 ms elapsed real time, including 108 ms collecting
    1719 ms elapsed user time, including 99 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1568016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-deriv:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2020304 bytes allocated
running stats for deriv (4000000):
    374 collections
    1730 ms elapsed cpu time, including 107 ms collecting
    1733 ms elapsed real time, including 108 ms collecting
    1720 ms elapsed user time, including 100 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1568016384 bytes allocated
running destruc
running stats for compile-destruc:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2470232 bytes allocated
running stats for destruc (800):
    69 collections
    1723 ms elapsed cpu time, including 59 ms collecting
    1726 ms elapsed real time, including 60 ms collecting
    1716 ms elapsed user time, including 54 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    286909184 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-destruc:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2470232 bytes allocated
running stats for destruc (800):
    69 collections
    1725 ms elapsed cpu time, including 59 ms collecting
    1731 ms elapsed real time, including 60 ms collecting
    1717 ms elapsed user time, including 54 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    286909184 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-destruc:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2470232 bytes allocated
running stats for destruc (800):
    69 collections
    1723 ms elapsed cpu time, including 58 ms collecting
    1727 ms elapsed real time, including 60 ms collecting
    1716 ms elapsed user time, including 53 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    286909184 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-destruc:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2470232 bytes allocated
running stats for destruc (800):
    69 collections
    1723 ms elapsed cpu time, including 59 ms collecting
    1726 ms elapsed real time, including 60 ms collecting
    1716 ms elapsed user time, including 54 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    286909184 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-destruc:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2470232 bytes allocated
running stats for destruc (800):
    69 collections
    1724 ms elapsed cpu time, including 59 ms collecting
    1726 ms elapsed real time, including 60 ms collecting
    1716 ms elapsed user time, including 54 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    286909184 bytes allocated
running diviter
running stats for compile-diviter:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1772856 bytes allocated
running stats for diviter (1200000):
    229 collections
    1048 ms elapsed cpu time, including 75 ms collecting
    1050 ms elapsed real time, including 77 ms collecting
    1040 ms elapsed user time, including 69 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    960016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-diviter:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1772856 bytes allocated
running stats for diviter (1200000):
    229 collections
    1048 ms elapsed cpu time, including 75 ms collecting
    1049 ms elapsed real time, including 77 ms collecting
    1040 ms elapsed user time, including 69 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    960016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-diviter:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1772856 bytes allocated
running stats for diviter (1200000):
    229 collections
    1047 ms elapsed cpu time, including 75 ms collecting
    1049 ms elapsed real time, including 76 ms collecting
    1039 ms elapsed user time, including 69 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    960016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-diviter:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1772856 bytes allocated
running stats for diviter (1200000):
    229 collections
    1048 ms elapsed cpu time, including 75 ms collecting
    1050 ms elapsed real time, including 77 ms collecting
    1040 ms elapsed user time, including 69 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    960016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-diviter:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1772856 bytes allocated
running stats for diviter (1200000):
    229 collections
    1048 ms elapsed cpu time, including 75 ms collecting
    1050 ms elapsed real time, including 77 ms collecting
    1040 ms elapsed user time, including 69 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    960016384 bytes allocated
running divrec
running stats for compile-divrec:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1756312 bytes allocated
running stats for divrec (1200000):
    229 collections
    1400 ms elapsed cpu time, including 76 ms collecting
    1402 ms elapsed real time, including 77 ms collecting
    1392 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    960016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-divrec:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1756312 bytes allocated
running stats for divrec (1200000):
    229 collections
    1399 ms elapsed cpu time, including 76 ms collecting
    1402 ms elapsed real time, including 77 ms collecting
    1391 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    960016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-divrec:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1756312 bytes allocated
running stats for divrec (1200000):
    229 collections
    1404 ms elapsed cpu time, including 76 ms collecting
    1407 ms elapsed real time, including 77 ms collecting
    1393 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    960016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-divrec:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1756312 bytes allocated
running stats for divrec (1200000):
    229 collections
    1401 ms elapsed cpu time, including 76 ms collecting
    1404 ms elapsed real time, including 77 ms collecting
    1393 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    960016384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-divrec:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1756312 bytes allocated
running stats for divrec (1200000):
    229 collections
    1400 ms elapsed cpu time, including 76 ms collecting
    1402 ms elapsed real time, including 77 ms collecting
    1392 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    960016384 bytes allocated
running dynamic
running stats for compile-dynamic:
    7 collections
    300 ms elapsed cpu time, including 88 ms collecting
    301 ms elapsed real time, including 89 ms collecting
    281 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 18 ms collecting
    28731336 bytes allocated
running stats for dynamic (70):
    63 collections
    1909 ms elapsed cpu time, including 179 ms collecting
    1912 ms elapsed real time, including 180 ms collecting
    1882 ms elapsed user time, including 165 ms collecting
    27 ms elapsed sys time, including 14 ms collecting
    264535008 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-dynamic:
    7 collections
    301 ms elapsed cpu time, including 88 ms collecting
    301 ms elapsed real time, including 89 ms collecting
    282 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 18 ms collecting
    28731336 bytes allocated
running stats for dynamic (70):
    63 collections
    1910 ms elapsed cpu time, including 179 ms collecting
    1913 ms elapsed real time, including 180 ms collecting
    1883 ms elapsed user time, including 165 ms collecting
    27 ms elapsed sys time, including 14 ms collecting
    264535008 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-dynamic:
    7 collections
    301 ms elapsed cpu time, including 88 ms collecting
    301 ms elapsed real time, including 89 ms collecting
    282 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 18 ms collecting
    28731336 bytes allocated
running stats for dynamic (70):
    63 collections
    1909 ms elapsed cpu time, including 179 ms collecting
    1911 ms elapsed real time, including 179 ms collecting
    1882 ms elapsed user time, including 165 ms collecting
    27 ms elapsed sys time, including 14 ms collecting
    264535008 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-dynamic:
    7 collections
    300 ms elapsed cpu time, including 88 ms collecting
    302 ms elapsed real time, including 89 ms collecting
    281 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 18 ms collecting
    28731336 bytes allocated
running stats for dynamic (70):
    63 collections
    1910 ms elapsed cpu time, including 179 ms collecting
    1912 ms elapsed real time, including 180 ms collecting
    1883 ms elapsed user time, including 165 ms collecting
    27 ms elapsed sys time, including 14 ms collecting
    264535008 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-dynamic:
    7 collections
    300 ms elapsed cpu time, including 88 ms collecting
    301 ms elapsed real time, including 89 ms collecting
    281 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 18 ms collecting
    28731336 bytes allocated
running stats for dynamic (70):
    63 collections
    1909 ms elapsed cpu time, including 179 ms collecting
    1911 ms elapsed real time, including 180 ms collecting
    1882 ms elapsed user time, including 165 ms collecting
    27 ms elapsed sys time, including 14 ms collecting
    264535008 bytes allocated
running earley
running stats for compile-earley:
    3 collections
    102 ms elapsed cpu time, including 36 ms collecting
    102 ms elapsed real time, including 37 ms collecting
    91 ms elapsed user time, including 26 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    11922904 bytes allocated
running stats for earley (400):
    250 collections
    1783 ms elapsed cpu time, including 254 ms collecting
    1786 ms elapsed real time, including 257 ms collecting
    1770 ms elapsed user time, including 245 ms collecting
    13 ms elapsed sys time, including 9 ms collecting
    1047442688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-earley:
    3 collections
    102 ms elapsed cpu time, including 36 ms collecting
    103 ms elapsed real time, including 37 ms collecting
    91 ms elapsed user time, including 26 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    11922904 bytes allocated
running stats for earley (400):
    250 collections
    1781 ms elapsed cpu time, including 255 ms collecting
    1785 ms elapsed real time, including 256 ms collecting
    1768 ms elapsed user time, including 245 ms collecting
    13 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1047442688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-earley:
    3 collections
    102 ms elapsed cpu time, including 36 ms collecting
    102 ms elapsed real time, including 37 ms collecting
    91 ms elapsed user time, including 26 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    11922904 bytes allocated
running stats for earley (400):
    250 collections
    1781 ms elapsed cpu time, including 255 ms collecting
    1784 ms elapsed real time, including 257 ms collecting
    1769 ms elapsed user time, including 246 ms collecting
    12 ms elapsed sys time, including 9 ms collecting
    1047442688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-earley:
    3 collections
    102 ms elapsed cpu time, including 36 ms collecting
    102 ms elapsed real time, including 37 ms collecting
    91 ms elapsed user time, including 26 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    11922904 bytes allocated
running stats for earley (400):
    250 collections
    1782 ms elapsed cpu time, including 254 ms collecting
    1784 ms elapsed real time, including 256 ms collecting
    1769 ms elapsed user time, including 245 ms collecting
    13 ms elapsed sys time, including 9 ms collecting
    1047442688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-earley:
    3 collections
    102 ms elapsed cpu time, including 36 ms collecting
    103 ms elapsed real time, including 37 ms collecting
    91 ms elapsed user time, including 26 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    11922904 bytes allocated
running stats for earley (400):
    250 collections
    1781 ms elapsed cpu time, including 254 ms collecting
    1784 ms elapsed real time, including 255 ms collecting
    1768 ms elapsed user time, including 244 ms collecting
    13 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1047442688 bytes allocated
running fft
running stats for compile-fft:
    1 collection
    57 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    57 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3633472 bytes allocated
running stats for fft (4000):
    444 collections
    1651 ms elapsed cpu time, including 127 ms collecting
    1654 ms elapsed real time, including 129 ms collecting
    1640 ms elapsed user time, including 119 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    1855760384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fft:
    1 collection
    57 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3633472 bytes allocated
running stats for fft (4000):
    444 collections
    1651 ms elapsed cpu time, including 126 ms collecting
    1654 ms elapsed real time, including 128 ms collecting
    1640 ms elapsed user time, including 118 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    1855760384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fft:
    1 collection
    57 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    57 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3633472 bytes allocated
running stats for fft (4000):
    444 collections
    1663 ms elapsed cpu time, including 126 ms collecting
    1665 ms elapsed real time, including 129 ms collecting
    1648 ms elapsed user time, including 119 ms collecting
    15 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1855760384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fft:
    1 collection
    57 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    57 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3633472 bytes allocated
running stats for fft (4000):
    444 collections
    1650 ms elapsed cpu time, including 125 ms collecting
    1652 ms elapsed real time, including 128 ms collecting
    1639 ms elapsed user time, including 118 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1855760384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fft:
    1 collection
    57 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3633472 bytes allocated
running stats for fft (4000):
    444 collections
    1653 ms elapsed cpu time, including 125 ms collecting
    1656 ms elapsed real time, including 128 ms collecting
    1642 ms elapsed user time, including 118 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1855760384 bytes allocated
running fib
running stats for compile-fib:
    1 collection
    43 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    33 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1624936 bytes allocated
running stats for fib (6):
    no collections
    1957 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1959 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1956 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fib:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1624936 bytes allocated
running stats for fib (6):
    no collections
    1960 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1962 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1959 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fib:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1624936 bytes allocated
running stats for fib (6):
    no collections
    1958 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1959 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1957 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fib:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1624936 bytes allocated
running stats for fib (6):
    no collections
    1959 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1959 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1958 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fib:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1624936 bytes allocated
running stats for fib (6):
    no collections
    1958 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1960 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1957 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running fibc
running stats for compile-fibc:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1871616 bytes allocated
running stats for fibc (900):
    115 collections
    1746 ms elapsed cpu time, including 243 ms collecting
    1749 ms elapsed real time, including 245 ms collecting
    1421 ms elapsed user time, including 102 ms collecting
    325 ms elapsed sys time, including 141 ms collecting
    481567360 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fibc:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1871616 bytes allocated
running stats for fibc (900):
    115 collections
    1743 ms elapsed cpu time, including 244 ms collecting
    1746 ms elapsed real time, including 244 ms collecting
    1420 ms elapsed user time, including 102 ms collecting
    323 ms elapsed sys time, including 142 ms collecting
    481567360 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fibc:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1871616 bytes allocated
running stats for fibc (900):
    115 collections
    1746 ms elapsed cpu time, including 244 ms collecting
    1748 ms elapsed real time, including 245 ms collecting
    1421 ms elapsed user time, including 102 ms collecting
    325 ms elapsed sys time, including 142 ms collecting
    481567360 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fibc:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1871616 bytes allocated
running stats for fibc (900):
    115 collections
    1745 ms elapsed cpu time, including 244 ms collecting
    1748 ms elapsed real time, including 245 ms collecting
    1421 ms elapsed user time, including 102 ms collecting
    324 ms elapsed sys time, including 142 ms collecting
    481567360 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fibc:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1871616 bytes allocated
running stats for fibc (900):
    115 collections
    1745 ms elapsed cpu time, including 243 ms collecting
    1749 ms elapsed real time, including 244 ms collecting
    1422 ms elapsed user time, including 102 ms collecting
    323 ms elapsed sys time, including 141 ms collecting
    481567360 bytes allocated
running fibfp
running stats for compile-fibfp:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1666136 bytes allocated
running stats for fibfp (2):
    342 collections
    1133 ms elapsed cpu time, including 102 ms collecting
    1135 ms elapsed real time, including 103 ms collecting
    1124 ms elapsed user time, including 95 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1433330080 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fibfp:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1666136 bytes allocated
running stats for fibfp (2):
    342 collections
    1133 ms elapsed cpu time, including 102 ms collecting
    1135 ms elapsed real time, including 103 ms collecting
    1124 ms elapsed user time, including 95 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1433330080 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fibfp:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1666136 bytes allocated
running stats for fibfp (2):
    342 collections
    1134 ms elapsed cpu time, including 101 ms collecting
    1135 ms elapsed real time, including 102 ms collecting
    1125 ms elapsed user time, including 94 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1433330080 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fibfp:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1666136 bytes allocated
running stats for fibfp (2):
    342 collections
    1132 ms elapsed cpu time, including 102 ms collecting
    1134 ms elapsed real time, including 103 ms collecting
    1123 ms elapsed user time, including 95 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1433330080 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fibfp:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1666136 bytes allocated
running stats for fibfp (2):
    342 collections
    1141 ms elapsed cpu time, including 102 ms collecting
    1145 ms elapsed real time, including 105 ms collecting
    1128 ms elapsed user time, including 95 ms collecting
    13 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1433330080 bytes allocated
running fpsum
running stats for compile-fpsum:
    1 collection
    43 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    33 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1625984 bytes allocated
running stats for fpsum (60):
    458 collections
    906 ms elapsed cpu time, including 113 ms collecting
    909 ms elapsed real time, including 115 ms collecting
    897 ms elapsed user time, including 106 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1920018304 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fpsum:
    1 collection
    43 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    33 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1625984 bytes allocated
running stats for fpsum (60):
    458 collections
    904 ms elapsed cpu time, including 113 ms collecting
    907 ms elapsed real time, including 115 ms collecting
    895 ms elapsed user time, including 106 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1920018304 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fpsum:
    1 collection
    43 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    33 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1625984 bytes allocated
running stats for fpsum (60):
    458 collections
    879 ms elapsed cpu time, including 113 ms collecting
    882 ms elapsed real time, including 115 ms collecting
    870 ms elapsed user time, including 106 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1920018304 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fpsum:
    1 collection
    43 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    33 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1625984 bytes allocated
running stats for fpsum (60):
    458 collections
    894 ms elapsed cpu time, including 113 ms collecting
    898 ms elapsed real time, including 115 ms collecting
    885 ms elapsed user time, including 106 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1920018304 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-fpsum:
    1 collection
    43 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    33 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1625984 bytes allocated
running stats for fpsum (60):
    458 collections
    902 ms elapsed cpu time, including 113 ms collecting
    906 ms elapsed real time, including 115 ms collecting
    894 ms elapsed user time, including 106 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1920018304 bytes allocated
running gcbench
running stats for compile-gcbench:
    1 collection
    52 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    52 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    42 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3354352 bytes allocated
running stats for GCBench18 (2):
    181 collections
    2406 ms elapsed cpu time, including 670 ms collecting
    2416 ms elapsed real time, including 674 ms collecting
    2322 ms elapsed user time, including 591 ms collecting
    84 ms elapsed sys time, including 79 ms collecting
    757033392 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-gcbench:
    1 collection
    52 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    53 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    42 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3354352 bytes allocated
running stats for GCBench18 (2):
    181 collections
    2405 ms elapsed cpu time, including 667 ms collecting
    2414 ms elapsed real time, including 671 ms collecting
    2321 ms elapsed user time, including 589 ms collecting
    84 ms elapsed sys time, including 78 ms collecting
    757033392 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-gcbench:
    1 collection
    52 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    52 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    42 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3354352 bytes allocated
running stats for GCBench18 (2):
    181 collections
    2404 ms elapsed cpu time, including 666 ms collecting
    2414 ms elapsed real time, including 670 ms collecting
    2320 ms elapsed user time, including 588 ms collecting
    84 ms elapsed sys time, including 78 ms collecting
    757033392 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-gcbench:
    1 collection
    52 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    52 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    42 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3354352 bytes allocated
running stats for GCBench18 (2):
    181 collections
    2405 ms elapsed cpu time, including 667 ms collecting
    2416 ms elapsed real time, including 673 ms collecting
    2321 ms elapsed user time, including 589 ms collecting
    84 ms elapsed sys time, including 78 ms collecting
    757033392 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-gcbench:
    1 collection
    52 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    53 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    42 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3354352 bytes allocated
running stats for GCBench18 (2):
    181 collections
    2402 ms elapsed cpu time, including 664 ms collecting
    2413 ms elapsed real time, including 669 ms collecting
    2318 ms elapsed user time, including 586 ms collecting
    84 ms elapsed sys time, including 78 ms collecting
    757033392 bytes allocated
running graphs
running stats for compile-graphs:
    2 collections
    75 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    75 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    64 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    6441112 bytes allocated
running stats for graphs (500):
    285 collections
    1621 ms elapsed cpu time, including 119 ms collecting
    1622 ms elapsed real time, including 121 ms collecting
    1612 ms elapsed user time, including 112 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1192800288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-graphs:
    2 collections
    75 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    75 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    64 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    6441112 bytes allocated
running stats for graphs (500):
    285 collections
    1621 ms elapsed cpu time, including 121 ms collecting
    1621 ms elapsed real time, including 122 ms collecting
    1612 ms elapsed user time, including 113 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    1192800288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-graphs:
    2 collections
    75 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    76 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    64 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    6441112 bytes allocated
running stats for graphs (500):
    285 collections
    1622 ms elapsed cpu time, including 120 ms collecting
    1622 ms elapsed real time, including 122 ms collecting
    1613 ms elapsed user time, including 113 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1192800288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-graphs:
    2 collections
    75 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    75 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    64 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    6441112 bytes allocated
running stats for graphs (500):
    285 collections
    1622 ms elapsed cpu time, including 120 ms collecting
    1624 ms elapsed real time, including 122 ms collecting
    1613 ms elapsed user time, including 113 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    1192800288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-graphs:
    2 collections
    75 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    75 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    64 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    6441112 bytes allocated
running stats for graphs (500):
    285 collections
    1622 ms elapsed cpu time, including 121 ms collecting
    1623 ms elapsed real time, including 122 ms collecting
    1613 ms elapsed user time, including 113 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    1192800288 bytes allocated
running lattice
running stats for compile-lattice:
    1 collection
    53 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    54 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    43 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3705664 bytes allocated
running stats for lattice (2):
    170 collections
    2540 ms elapsed cpu time, including 70 ms collecting
    2541 ms elapsed real time, including 71 ms collecting
    2527 ms elapsed user time, including 64 ms collecting
    13 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    709273600 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-lattice:
    1 collection
    54 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    54 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3705664 bytes allocated
running stats for lattice (2):
    170 collections
    2533 ms elapsed cpu time, including 70 ms collecting
    2534 ms elapsed real time, including 71 ms collecting
    2526 ms elapsed user time, including 64 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    709273600 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-lattice:
    1 collection
    53 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    54 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    43 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3705664 bytes allocated
running stats for lattice (2):
    170 collections
    2534 ms elapsed cpu time, including 71 ms collecting
    2536 ms elapsed real time, including 71 ms collecting
    2527 ms elapsed user time, including 65 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    709273600 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-lattice:
    1 collection
    54 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    54 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3705664 bytes allocated
running stats for lattice (2):
    170 collections
    2533 ms elapsed cpu time, including 70 ms collecting
    2534 ms elapsed real time, including 71 ms collecting
    2526 ms elapsed user time, including 64 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    709273600 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-lattice:
    1 collection
    53 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    54 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    43 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3705664 bytes allocated
running stats for lattice (2):
    170 collections
    2534 ms elapsed cpu time, including 71 ms collecting
    2534 ms elapsed real time, including 71 ms collecting
    2527 ms elapsed user time, including 65 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    709273600 bytes allocated
running matrix
running stats for compile-matrix:
    2 collections
    83 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    83 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    72 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8447208 bytes allocated
running stats for matrix (600):
    196 collections
    1563 ms elapsed cpu time, including 76 ms collecting
    1565 ms elapsed real time, including 77 ms collecting
    1555 ms elapsed user time, including 69 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    820087488 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-matrix:
    2 collections
    83 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    83 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    72 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8447208 bytes allocated
running stats for matrix (600):
    196 collections
    1562 ms elapsed cpu time, including 76 ms collecting
    1563 ms elapsed real time, including 77 ms collecting
    1554 ms elapsed user time, including 69 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    820087488 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-matrix:
    2 collections
    83 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    83 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    72 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8447208 bytes allocated
running stats for matrix (600):
    196 collections
    1563 ms elapsed cpu time, including 76 ms collecting
    1563 ms elapsed real time, including 77 ms collecting
    1555 ms elapsed user time, including 69 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    820087488 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-matrix:
    2 collections
    83 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    83 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    72 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8447208 bytes allocated
running stats for matrix (600):
    196 collections
    1564 ms elapsed cpu time, including 76 ms collecting
    1564 ms elapsed real time, including 77 ms collecting
    1556 ms elapsed user time, including 69 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    820087488 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-matrix:
    2 collections
    83 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    83 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    72 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8447208 bytes allocated
running stats for matrix (600):
    196 collections
    1563 ms elapsed cpu time, including 76 ms collecting
    1564 ms elapsed real time, including 77 ms collecting
    1555 ms elapsed user time, including 69 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    820087488 bytes allocated
running maze
running stats for compile-maze:
    3 collections
    92 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    92 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    81 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    9944744 bytes allocated
running stats for maze (4000):
    55 collections
    1272 ms elapsed cpu time, including 47 ms collecting
    1272 ms elapsed real time, including 48 ms collecting
    1264 ms elapsed user time, including 40 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    229388304 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-maze:
    3 collections
    92 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    92 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    81 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    9944744 bytes allocated
running stats for maze (4000):
    55 collections
    1271 ms elapsed cpu time, including 47 ms collecting
    1271 ms elapsed real time, including 47 ms collecting
    1263 ms elapsed user time, including 40 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    229388304 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-maze:
    3 collections
    92 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    92 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    81 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    9944744 bytes allocated
running stats for maze (4000):
    55 collections
    1270 ms elapsed cpu time, including 47 ms collecting
    1271 ms elapsed real time, including 47 ms collecting
    1263 ms elapsed user time, including 40 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    229388304 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-maze:
    3 collections
    92 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    93 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    81 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    9944744 bytes allocated
running stats for maze (4000):
    55 collections
    1271 ms elapsed cpu time, including 47 ms collecting
    1272 ms elapsed real time, including 47 ms collecting
    1263 ms elapsed user time, including 40 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    229388304 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-maze:
    3 collections
    92 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    92 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    81 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    9944744 bytes allocated
running stats for maze (4000):
    55 collections
    1270 ms elapsed cpu time, including 47 ms collecting
    1271 ms elapsed real time, including 47 ms collecting
    1263 ms elapsed user time, including 40 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    229388304 bytes allocated
running mazefun
running stats for compile-mazefun:
    1 collection
    56 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    56 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4131552 bytes allocated
running stats for mazefun (2500):
    90 collections
    2015 ms elapsed cpu time, including 62 ms collecting
    2016 ms elapsed real time, including 62 ms collecting
    2009 ms elapsed user time, including 56 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    376336384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-mazefun:
    1 collection
    56 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    56 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4131552 bytes allocated
running stats for mazefun (2500):
    90 collections
    2018 ms elapsed cpu time, including 62 ms collecting
    2019 ms elapsed real time, including 62 ms collecting
    2010 ms elapsed user time, including 56 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    376336384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-mazefun:
    1 collection
    56 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    56 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4131552 bytes allocated
running stats for mazefun (2500):
    90 collections
    2015 ms elapsed cpu time, including 62 ms collecting
    2016 ms elapsed real time, including 62 ms collecting
    2009 ms elapsed user time, including 56 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    376336384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-mazefun:
    1 collection
    56 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    56 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4131552 bytes allocated
running stats for mazefun (2500):
    90 collections
    2015 ms elapsed cpu time, including 62 ms collecting
    2015 ms elapsed real time, including 62 ms collecting
    2009 ms elapsed user time, including 56 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    376336384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-mazefun:
    1 collection
    56 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    56 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4131552 bytes allocated
running stats for mazefun (2500):
    90 collections
    2015 ms elapsed cpu time, including 62 ms collecting
    2016 ms elapsed real time, including 62 ms collecting
    2009 ms elapsed user time, including 56 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    376336384 bytes allocated
running mbrot
running stats for compile-mbrot:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2556008 bytes allocated
running stats for mbrot (120):
    635 collections
    1312 ms elapsed cpu time, including 166 ms collecting
    1314 ms elapsed real time, including 168 ms collecting
    1303 ms elapsed user time, including 158 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    2658929344 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-mbrot:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2556008 bytes allocated
running stats for mbrot (120):
    635 collections
    1339 ms elapsed cpu time, including 166 ms collecting
    1339 ms elapsed real time, including 169 ms collecting
    1329 ms elapsed user time, including 158 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    2658929344 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-mbrot:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2556008 bytes allocated
running stats for mbrot (120):
    635 collections
    1322 ms elapsed cpu time, including 166 ms collecting
    1324 ms elapsed real time, including 168 ms collecting
    1313 ms elapsed user time, including 158 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    2658929344 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-mbrot:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2556008 bytes allocated
running stats for mbrot (120):
    635 collections
    1332 ms elapsed cpu time, including 167 ms collecting
    1333 ms elapsed real time, including 169 ms collecting
    1323 ms elapsed user time, including 159 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    2658929344 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-mbrot:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2556008 bytes allocated
running stats for mbrot (120):
    635 collections
    1309 ms elapsed cpu time, including 166 ms collecting
    1311 ms elapsed real time, including 168 ms collecting
    1300 ms elapsed user time, including 158 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    2658929344 bytes allocated
running nbody
running stats for compile-nbody:
    6 collections
    212 ms elapsed cpu time, including 79 ms collecting
    213 ms elapsed real time, including 79 ms collecting
    193 ms elapsed user time, including 60 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 19 ms collecting
    24179864 bytes allocated
Unhandled exception:
 Condition components:
   1. &assertion
   2. &who: fl+
   3. &message: "not a flonum"
   4. &irritants: (0)
ERROR: nbody failed
running stats for compile-nbody:
    6 collections
    212 ms elapsed cpu time, including 79 ms collecting
    212 ms elapsed real time, including 79 ms collecting
    193 ms elapsed user time, including 60 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 19 ms collecting
    24179864 bytes allocated
Unhandled exception:
 Condition components:
   1. &assertion
   2. &who: fl+
   3. &message: "not a flonum"
   4. &irritants: (0)
ERROR: nbody failed
running stats for compile-nbody:
    6 collections
    212 ms elapsed cpu time, including 79 ms collecting
    213 ms elapsed real time, including 79 ms collecting
    193 ms elapsed user time, including 60 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 19 ms collecting
    24179864 bytes allocated
Unhandled exception:
 Condition components:
   1. &assertion
   2. &who: fl+
   3. &message: "not a flonum"
   4. &irritants: (0)
ERROR: nbody failed
running stats for compile-nbody:
    6 collections
    212 ms elapsed cpu time, including 79 ms collecting
    212 ms elapsed real time, including 79 ms collecting
    193 ms elapsed user time, including 60 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 19 ms collecting
    24179864 bytes allocated
Unhandled exception:
 Condition components:
   1. &assertion
   2. &who: fl+
   3. &message: "not a flonum"
   4. &irritants: (0)
ERROR: nbody failed
running stats for compile-nbody:
    6 collections
    212 ms elapsed cpu time, including 79 ms collecting
    213 ms elapsed real time, including 79 ms collecting
    193 ms elapsed user time, including 60 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 19 ms collecting
    24179864 bytes allocated
Unhandled exception:
 Condition components:
   1. &assertion
   2. &who: fl+
   3. &message: "not a flonum"
   4. &irritants: (0)
ERROR: nbody failed
running nboyer
running stats for compile-nboyer:
    2 collections
    68 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    68 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    57 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5537680 bytes allocated
running stats for nboyer0 (150):
    73 collections
    1772 ms elapsed cpu time, including 144 ms collecting
    1774 ms elapsed real time, including 145 ms collecting
    1762 ms elapsed user time, including 135 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 9 ms collecting
    305504688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nboyer:
    2 collections
    68 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    68 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    57 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5537680 bytes allocated
running stats for nboyer0 (150):
    73 collections
    1772 ms elapsed cpu time, including 144 ms collecting
    1774 ms elapsed real time, including 145 ms collecting
    1762 ms elapsed user time, including 135 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 9 ms collecting
    305504688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nboyer:
    2 collections
    67 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    68 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    57 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5537680 bytes allocated
running stats for nboyer0 (150):
    73 collections
    1772 ms elapsed cpu time, including 144 ms collecting
    1772 ms elapsed real time, including 145 ms collecting
    1762 ms elapsed user time, including 135 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 9 ms collecting
    305504688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nboyer:
    2 collections
    68 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    68 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    57 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5537680 bytes allocated
running stats for nboyer0 (150):
    73 collections
    1772 ms elapsed cpu time, including 144 ms collecting
    1773 ms elapsed real time, including 145 ms collecting
    1762 ms elapsed user time, including 135 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 9 ms collecting
    305504688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nboyer:
    2 collections
    69 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    69 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5537680 bytes allocated
running stats for nboyer0 (150):
    73 collections
    1772 ms elapsed cpu time, including 144 ms collecting
    1772 ms elapsed real time, including 145 ms collecting
    1762 ms elapsed user time, including 135 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 9 ms collecting
    305504688 bytes allocated
running nqueens
running stats for compile-nqueens:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1954248 bytes allocated
running stats for nqueens (4000):
    92 collections
    1998 ms elapsed cpu time, including 59 ms collecting
    1998 ms elapsed real time, including 61 ms collecting
    1992 ms elapsed user time, including 54 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    384784384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nqueens:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1954248 bytes allocated
running stats for nqueens (4000):
    92 collections
    2000 ms elapsed cpu time, including 60 ms collecting
    2000 ms elapsed real time, including 61 ms collecting
    1992 ms elapsed user time, including 55 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    384784384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nqueens:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1954248 bytes allocated
running stats for nqueens (4000):
    92 collections
    1998 ms elapsed cpu time, including 60 ms collecting
    1998 ms elapsed real time, including 61 ms collecting
    1992 ms elapsed user time, including 55 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    384784384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nqueens:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1954248 bytes allocated
running stats for nqueens (4000):
    92 collections
    1998 ms elapsed cpu time, including 59 ms collecting
    1998 ms elapsed real time, including 61 ms collecting
    1992 ms elapsed user time, including 54 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    384784384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nqueens:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1954248 bytes allocated
running stats for nqueens (4000):
    92 collections
    1998 ms elapsed cpu time, including 60 ms collecting
    1998 ms elapsed real time, including 61 ms collecting
    1992 ms elapsed user time, including 55 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    384784384 bytes allocated
running ntakl
running stats for compile-ntakl:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1866224 bytes allocated
running stats for ntakl (600):
    no collections
    2285 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    2287 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    2285 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ntakl:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1866224 bytes allocated
running stats for ntakl (600):
    no collections
    2285 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    2286 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    2285 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ntakl:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1866224 bytes allocated
running stats for ntakl (600):
    no collections
    2285 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    2286 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    2285 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ntakl:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1866224 bytes allocated
running stats for ntakl (600):
    no collections
    2285 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    2286 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    2285 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ntakl:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1866224 bytes allocated
running stats for ntakl (600):
    no collections
    2285 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    2286 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    2285 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running nucleic
running stats for compile-nucleic:
    12 collections
    396 ms elapsed cpu time, including 97 ms collecting
    397 ms elapsed real time, including 97 ms collecting
    377 ms elapsed user time, including 79 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 18 ms collecting
    46423800 bytes allocated
running stats for nucleic (12):
    266 collections
    1092 ms elapsed cpu time, including 99 ms collecting
    1092 ms elapsed real time, including 100 ms collecting
    1086 ms elapsed user time, including 94 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    1117206528 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nucleic:
    12 collections
    394 ms elapsed cpu time, including 96 ms collecting
    395 ms elapsed real time, including 96 ms collecting
    376 ms elapsed user time, including 78 ms collecting
    18 ms elapsed sys time, including 18 ms collecting
    46423800 bytes allocated
running stats for nucleic (12):
    266 collections
    1094 ms elapsed cpu time, including 99 ms collecting
    1095 ms elapsed real time, including 100 ms collecting
    1089 ms elapsed user time, including 95 ms collecting
    5 ms elapsed sys time, including 4 ms collecting
    1117206528 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nucleic:
    12 collections
    394 ms elapsed cpu time, including 96 ms collecting
    394 ms elapsed real time, including 96 ms collecting
    376 ms elapsed user time, including 78 ms collecting
    18 ms elapsed sys time, including 18 ms collecting
    46423800 bytes allocated
running stats for nucleic (12):
    266 collections
    1093 ms elapsed cpu time, including 99 ms collecting
    1094 ms elapsed real time, including 100 ms collecting
    1087 ms elapsed user time, including 94 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    1117206528 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nucleic:
    12 collections
    394 ms elapsed cpu time, including 96 ms collecting
    396 ms elapsed real time, including 96 ms collecting
    376 ms elapsed user time, including 78 ms collecting
    18 ms elapsed sys time, including 18 ms collecting
    46423800 bytes allocated
running stats for nucleic (12):
    266 collections
    1092 ms elapsed cpu time, including 98 ms collecting
    1093 ms elapsed real time, including 100 ms collecting
    1087 ms elapsed user time, including 94 ms collecting
    5 ms elapsed sys time, including 4 ms collecting
    1117206528 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-nucleic:
    12 collections
    394 ms elapsed cpu time, including 96 ms collecting
    395 ms elapsed real time, including 96 ms collecting
    376 ms elapsed user time, including 78 ms collecting
    18 ms elapsed sys time, including 18 ms collecting
    46423800 bytes allocated
running stats for nucleic (12):
    266 collections
    1092 ms elapsed cpu time, including 98 ms collecting
    1093 ms elapsed real time, including 100 ms collecting
    1087 ms elapsed user time, including 94 ms collecting
    5 ms elapsed sys time, including 4 ms collecting
    1117206528 bytes allocated
running paraffins
running stats for compile-paraffins:
    1 collection
    57 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    57 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4253720 bytes allocated
running stats for paraffins (1800):
    354 collections
    1687 ms elapsed cpu time, including 592 ms collecting
    1688 ms elapsed real time, including 594 ms collecting
    1669 ms elapsed user time, including 575 ms collecting
    18 ms elapsed sys time, including 17 ms collecting
    1481632384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-paraffins:
    1 collection
    57 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    57 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4253720 bytes allocated
running stats for paraffins (1800):
    354 collections
    1694 ms elapsed cpu time, including 594 ms collecting
    1696 ms elapsed real time, including 596 ms collecting
    1673 ms elapsed user time, including 576 ms collecting
    21 ms elapsed sys time, including 18 ms collecting
    1481632384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-paraffins:
    1 collection
    57 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    57 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4253720 bytes allocated
running stats for paraffins (1800):
    354 collections
    1690 ms elapsed cpu time, including 592 ms collecting
    1692 ms elapsed real time, including 594 ms collecting
    1672 ms elapsed user time, including 575 ms collecting
    18 ms elapsed sys time, including 17 ms collecting
    1481632384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-paraffins:
    1 collection
    57 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    57 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4253720 bytes allocated
running stats for paraffins (1800):
    354 collections
    1687 ms elapsed cpu time, including 593 ms collecting
    1689 ms elapsed real time, including 595 ms collecting
    1668 ms elapsed user time, including 576 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 17 ms collecting
    1481632384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-paraffins:
    1 collection
    57 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    57 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4253720 bytes allocated
running stats for paraffins (1800):
    354 collections
    1689 ms elapsed cpu time, including 593 ms collecting
    1691 ms elapsed real time, including 595 ms collecting
    1670 ms elapsed user time, including 576 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 17 ms collecting
    1481632384 bytes allocated
running parsing
running stats for compile-parsing:
    3 collections
    109 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    109 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    98 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    10781512 bytes allocated
running stats for parsing:parsing-data.ss:360 (360):
    14 collections
    1939 ms elapsed cpu time, including 42 ms collecting
    1940 ms elapsed real time, including 42 ms collecting
    1931 ms elapsed user time, including 34 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    57093888 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-parsing:
    3 collections
    110 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    110 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    99 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    10781512 bytes allocated
running stats for parsing:parsing-data.ss:360 (360):
    14 collections
    1932 ms elapsed cpu time, including 42 ms collecting
    1933 ms elapsed real time, including 42 ms collecting
    1924 ms elapsed user time, including 34 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    57093888 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-parsing:
    3 collections
    109 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    110 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    98 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    10781512 bytes allocated
running stats for parsing:parsing-data.ss:360 (360):
    14 collections
    1937 ms elapsed cpu time, including 42 ms collecting
    1938 ms elapsed real time, including 42 ms collecting
    1929 ms elapsed user time, including 34 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    57093888 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-parsing:
    3 collections
    109 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    110 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    98 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    10781512 bytes allocated
running stats for parsing:parsing-data.ss:360 (360):
    14 collections
    1939 ms elapsed cpu time, including 42 ms collecting
    1940 ms elapsed real time, including 43 ms collecting
    1931 ms elapsed user time, including 34 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    57093888 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-parsing:
    3 collections
    110 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    110 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    99 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    10781512 bytes allocated
running stats for parsing:parsing-data.ss:360 (360):
    14 collections
    1932 ms elapsed cpu time, including 42 ms collecting
    1933 ms elapsed real time, including 42 ms collecting
    1924 ms elapsed user time, including 34 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    57093888 bytes allocated
running perm9
running stats for compile-perm9:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2419984 bytes allocated
running stats for perm9 (12):
    43 collections
    1704 ms elapsed cpu time, including 1278 ms collecting
    1704 ms elapsed real time, including 1278 ms collecting
    1425 ms elapsed user time, including 1000 ms collecting
    279 ms elapsed sys time, including 278 ms collecting
    179592448 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-perm9:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2419984 bytes allocated
running stats for perm9 (12):
    43 collections
    1696 ms elapsed cpu time, including 1272 ms collecting
    1697 ms elapsed real time, including 1272 ms collecting
    1418 ms elapsed user time, including 994 ms collecting
    278 ms elapsed sys time, including 278 ms collecting
    179592448 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-perm9:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2419984 bytes allocated
running stats for perm9 (12):
    43 collections
    1702 ms elapsed cpu time, including 1277 ms collecting
    1704 ms elapsed real time, including 1277 ms collecting
    1424 ms elapsed user time, including 1000 ms collecting
    278 ms elapsed sys time, including 277 ms collecting
    179592448 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-perm9:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2419984 bytes allocated
running stats for perm9 (12):
    43 collections
    1699 ms elapsed cpu time, including 1275 ms collecting
    1701 ms elapsed real time, including 1275 ms collecting
    1421 ms elapsed user time, including 997 ms collecting
    278 ms elapsed sys time, including 278 ms collecting
    179592448 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-perm9:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2419984 bytes allocated
running stats for perm9 (12):
    43 collections
    1701 ms elapsed cpu time, including 1276 ms collecting
    1703 ms elapsed real time, including 1276 ms collecting
    1423 ms elapsed user time, including 999 ms collecting
    278 ms elapsed sys time, including 277 ms collecting
    179592448 bytes allocated
running peval
running stats for compile-peval:
    3 collections
    103 ms elapsed cpu time, including 36 ms collecting
    103 ms elapsed real time, including 37 ms collecting
    92 ms elapsed user time, including 26 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    11420936 bytes allocated
running stats for peval (400):
    70 collections
    1711 ms elapsed cpu time, including 66 ms collecting
    1713 ms elapsed real time, including 66 ms collecting
    1703 ms elapsed user time, including 58 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    290635040 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-peval:
    3 collections
    103 ms elapsed cpu time, including 36 ms collecting
    103 ms elapsed real time, including 37 ms collecting
    92 ms elapsed user time, including 26 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    11420936 bytes allocated
running stats for peval (400):
    70 collections
    1717 ms elapsed cpu time, including 66 ms collecting
    1718 ms elapsed real time, including 66 ms collecting
    1704 ms elapsed user time, including 58 ms collecting
    13 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    290635040 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-peval:
    3 collections
    103 ms elapsed cpu time, including 36 ms collecting
    103 ms elapsed real time, including 37 ms collecting
    92 ms elapsed user time, including 26 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    11420936 bytes allocated
running stats for peval (400):
    70 collections
    1711 ms elapsed cpu time, including 66 ms collecting
    1714 ms elapsed real time, including 66 ms collecting
    1703 ms elapsed user time, including 58 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    290635040 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-peval:
    3 collections
    103 ms elapsed cpu time, including 36 ms collecting
    103 ms elapsed real time, including 37 ms collecting
    92 ms elapsed user time, including 26 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    11420936 bytes allocated
running stats for peval (400):
    70 collections
    1711 ms elapsed cpu time, including 66 ms collecting
    1713 ms elapsed real time, including 66 ms collecting
    1703 ms elapsed user time, including 58 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    290635040 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-peval:
    3 collections
    103 ms elapsed cpu time, including 36 ms collecting
    103 ms elapsed real time, including 37 ms collecting
    92 ms elapsed user time, including 26 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    11420936 bytes allocated
running stats for peval (400):
    70 collections
    1711 ms elapsed cpu time, including 66 ms collecting
    1712 ms elapsed real time, including 66 ms collecting
    1703 ms elapsed user time, including 58 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    290635040 bytes allocated
running pi
running stats for compile-pi:
    1 collection
    54 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    55 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4160792 bytes allocated
running stats for pi (3):
    92 collections
    521 ms elapsed cpu time, including 61 ms collecting
    521 ms elapsed real time, including 61 ms collecting
    515 ms elapsed user time, including 55 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    384915016 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-pi:
    1 collection
    54 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    55 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4160792 bytes allocated
running stats for pi (3):
    92 collections
    521 ms elapsed cpu time, including 61 ms collecting
    521 ms elapsed real time, including 61 ms collecting
    515 ms elapsed user time, including 55 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    384915016 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-pi:
    1 collection
    54 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    55 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4160792 bytes allocated
running stats for pi (3):
    92 collections
    521 ms elapsed cpu time, including 61 ms collecting
    522 ms elapsed real time, including 61 ms collecting
    515 ms elapsed user time, including 55 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    384915016 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-pi:
    1 collection
    54 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    55 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4160792 bytes allocated
running stats for pi (3):
    92 collections
    521 ms elapsed cpu time, including 62 ms collecting
    522 ms elapsed real time, including 62 ms collecting
    515 ms elapsed user time, including 56 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    384915016 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-pi:
    1 collection
    54 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    55 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4160792 bytes allocated
running stats for pi (3):
    92 collections
    520 ms elapsed cpu time, including 61 ms collecting
    521 ms elapsed real time, including 61 ms collecting
    514 ms elapsed user time, including 55 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    384915016 bytes allocated
running pnpoly
running stats for compile-pnpoly:
    1 collection
    50 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    40 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2915816 bytes allocated
running stats for pnpoly (140000):
    112 collections
    1330 ms elapsed cpu time, including 62 ms collecting
    1331 ms elapsed real time, including 63 ms collecting
    1324 ms elapsed user time, including 57 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    469296384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-pnpoly:
    1 collection
    50 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    40 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2915816 bytes allocated
running stats for pnpoly (140000):
    112 collections
    1330 ms elapsed cpu time, including 62 ms collecting
    1331 ms elapsed real time, including 63 ms collecting
    1324 ms elapsed user time, including 57 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    469296384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-pnpoly:
    1 collection
    50 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    40 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2915816 bytes allocated
running stats for pnpoly (140000):
    112 collections
    1330 ms elapsed cpu time, including 62 ms collecting
    1331 ms elapsed real time, including 63 ms collecting
    1324 ms elapsed user time, including 57 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    469296384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-pnpoly:
    1 collection
    50 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    40 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2915816 bytes allocated
running stats for pnpoly (140000):
    112 collections
    1330 ms elapsed cpu time, including 62 ms collecting
    1330 ms elapsed real time, including 63 ms collecting
    1324 ms elapsed user time, including 57 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    469296384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-pnpoly:
    1 collection
    50 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    40 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2915816 bytes allocated
running stats for pnpoly (140000):
    112 collections
    1330 ms elapsed cpu time, including 62 ms collecting
    1332 ms elapsed real time, including 63 ms collecting
    1324 ms elapsed user time, including 57 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    469296384 bytes allocated
running primes
running stats for compile-primes:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1889456 bytes allocated
running stats for primes (180000):
    158 collections
    1997 ms elapsed cpu time, including 68 ms collecting
    1998 ms elapsed real time, including 68 ms collecting
    1991 ms elapsed user time, including 62 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    663856384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-primes:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1889456 bytes allocated
running stats for primes (180000):
    158 collections
    1997 ms elapsed cpu time, including 67 ms collecting
    1998 ms elapsed real time, including 68 ms collecting
    1991 ms elapsed user time, including 62 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    663856384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-primes:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1889456 bytes allocated
running stats for primes (180000):
    158 collections
    2000 ms elapsed cpu time, including 68 ms collecting
    2005 ms elapsed real time, including 69 ms collecting
    1993 ms elapsed user time, including 62 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    663856384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-primes:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1889456 bytes allocated
running stats for primes (180000):
    158 collections
    2010 ms elapsed cpu time, including 68 ms collecting
    2025 ms elapsed real time, including 70 ms collecting
    2001 ms elapsed user time, including 62 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    663856384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-primes:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1889456 bytes allocated
running stats for primes (180000):
    158 collections
    2000 ms elapsed cpu time, including 68 ms collecting
    2001 ms elapsed real time, including 68 ms collecting
    1994 ms elapsed user time, including 62 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    663856384 bytes allocated
running puzzle
running stats for compile-puzzle:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4475296 bytes allocated
running stats for puzzle (180):
    22 collections
    1850 ms elapsed cpu time, including 39 ms collecting
    1851 ms elapsed real time, including 40 ms collecting
    1833 ms elapsed user time, including 34 ms collecting
    17 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    90802672 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-puzzle:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4475296 bytes allocated
running stats for puzzle (180):
    22 collections
    1844 ms elapsed cpu time, including 40 ms collecting
    1846 ms elapsed real time, including 41 ms collecting
    1833 ms elapsed user time, including 35 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    90802672 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-puzzle:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4475296 bytes allocated
running stats for puzzle (180):
    22 collections
    1844 ms elapsed cpu time, including 39 ms collecting
    1852 ms elapsed real time, including 41 ms collecting
    1833 ms elapsed user time, including 34 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    90802672 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-puzzle:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4475296 bytes allocated
running stats for puzzle (180):
    22 collections
    1847 ms elapsed cpu time, including 40 ms collecting
    1854 ms elapsed real time, including 41 ms collecting
    1835 ms elapsed user time, including 35 ms collecting
    12 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    90802672 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-puzzle:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4475296 bytes allocated
running stats for puzzle (180):
    22 collections
    1843 ms elapsed cpu time, including 40 ms collecting
    1844 ms elapsed real time, including 40 ms collecting
    1832 ms elapsed user time, including 35 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 5 ms collecting
    90802672 bytes allocated
running quicksort
running stats for compile-quicksort:
    1 collection
    51 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    41 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3034296 bytes allocated
running stats for quicksort30 (60):
    38 collections
    1595 ms elapsed cpu time, including 60 ms collecting
    1596 ms elapsed real time, including 60 ms collecting
    1582 ms elapsed user time, including 47 ms collecting
    13 ms elapsed sys time, including 13 ms collecting
    157367664 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-quicksort:
    1 collection
    51 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    41 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3034296 bytes allocated
running stats for quicksort30 (60):
    38 collections
    1596 ms elapsed cpu time, including 60 ms collecting
    1597 ms elapsed real time, including 60 ms collecting
    1583 ms elapsed user time, including 47 ms collecting
    13 ms elapsed sys time, including 13 ms collecting
    157367664 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-quicksort:
    1 collection
    51 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    41 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3034296 bytes allocated
running stats for quicksort30 (60):
    38 collections
    1596 ms elapsed cpu time, including 60 ms collecting
    1597 ms elapsed real time, including 60 ms collecting
    1583 ms elapsed user time, including 47 ms collecting
    13 ms elapsed sys time, including 13 ms collecting
    157367664 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-quicksort:
    1 collection
    51 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    41 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3034296 bytes allocated
running stats for quicksort30 (60):
    38 collections
    1595 ms elapsed cpu time, including 60 ms collecting
    1596 ms elapsed real time, including 60 ms collecting
    1582 ms elapsed user time, including 47 ms collecting
    13 ms elapsed sys time, including 13 ms collecting
    157367664 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-quicksort:
    1 collection
    51 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    41 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    3034296 bytes allocated
running stats for quicksort30 (60):
    38 collections
    1595 ms elapsed cpu time, including 60 ms collecting
    1596 ms elapsed real time, including 60 ms collecting
    1582 ms elapsed user time, including 47 ms collecting
    13 ms elapsed sys time, including 13 ms collecting
    157367664 bytes allocated
running ray
running stats for compile-ray:
    2 collections
    74 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    74 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    64 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    6551128 bytes allocated
running stats for ray (5):
    164 collections
    1184 ms elapsed cpu time, including 73 ms collecting
    1186 ms elapsed real time, including 74 ms collecting
    836 ms elapsed user time, including 65 ms collecting
    348 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    687672248 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ray:
    2 collections
    73 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    74 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    63 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    6551128 bytes allocated
running stats for ray (5):
    164 collections
    1182 ms elapsed cpu time, including 73 ms collecting
    1183 ms elapsed real time, including 74 ms collecting
    834 ms elapsed user time, including 65 ms collecting
    348 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    687672248 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ray:
    2 collections
    74 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    74 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    64 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    6551128 bytes allocated
running stats for ray (5):
    164 collections
    1183 ms elapsed cpu time, including 73 ms collecting
    1184 ms elapsed real time, including 74 ms collecting
    835 ms elapsed user time, including 65 ms collecting
    348 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    687672248 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ray:
    2 collections
    74 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    74 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    64 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    6551128 bytes allocated
running stats for ray (5):
    164 collections
    1185 ms elapsed cpu time, including 73 ms collecting
    1186 ms elapsed real time, including 74 ms collecting
    837 ms elapsed user time, including 65 ms collecting
    348 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    687672248 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-ray:
    2 collections
    73 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    74 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    63 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    6551128 bytes allocated
running stats for ray (5):
    164 collections
    1197 ms elapsed cpu time, including 74 ms collecting
    1697 ms elapsed real time, including 75 ms collecting
    844 ms elapsed user time, including 66 ms collecting
    353 ms elapsed sys time, including 8 ms collecting
    687672248 bytes allocated
running sboyer
running stats for compile-sboyer:
    2 collections
    69 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    69 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5596928 bytes allocated
running stats for sboyer0 (200):
    31 collections
    2213 ms elapsed cpu time, including 45 ms collecting
    2214 ms elapsed real time, including 45 ms collecting
    2207 ms elapsed user time, including 39 ms collecting
    6 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    132330688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sboyer:
    2 collections
    69 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    69 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5596928 bytes allocated
running stats for sboyer0 (200):
    31 collections
    2214 ms elapsed cpu time, including 45 ms collecting
    2214 ms elapsed real time, including 45 ms collecting
    2207 ms elapsed user time, including 39 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    132330688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sboyer:
    2 collections
    69 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    69 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5596928 bytes allocated
running stats for sboyer0 (200):
    31 collections
    2220 ms elapsed cpu time, including 45 ms collecting
    2228 ms elapsed real time, including 45 ms collecting
    2210 ms elapsed user time, including 39 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    132330688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sboyer:
    2 collections
    69 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    69 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5596928 bytes allocated
running stats for sboyer0 (200):
    31 collections
    2214 ms elapsed cpu time, including 45 ms collecting
    2215 ms elapsed real time, including 45 ms collecting
    2207 ms elapsed user time, including 39 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    132330688 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sboyer:
    2 collections
    69 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    69 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    58 ms elapsed user time, including 23 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5596928 bytes allocated
running stats for sboyer0 (200):
    31 collections
    2214 ms elapsed cpu time, including 45 ms collecting
    2215 ms elapsed real time, including 45 ms collecting
    2207 ms elapsed user time, including 39 ms collecting
    7 ms elapsed sys time, including 6 ms collecting
    132330688 bytes allocated
running scheme
running stats for compile-scheme:
    6 collections
    565 ms elapsed cpu time, including 90 ms collecting
    566 ms elapsed real time, including 91 ms collecting
    544 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    21 ms elapsed sys time, including 20 ms collecting
    24176528 bytes allocated
running stats for scheme (40000):
    44 collections
    1632 ms elapsed cpu time, including 25 ms collecting
    1632 ms elapsed real time, including 26 ms collecting
    1631 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    184960000 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-scheme:
    6 collections
    566 ms elapsed cpu time, including 91 ms collecting
    566 ms elapsed real time, including 91 ms collecting
    545 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    21 ms elapsed sys time, including 20 ms collecting
    24176528 bytes allocated
running stats for scheme (40000):
    44 collections
    1632 ms elapsed cpu time, including 25 ms collecting
    1632 ms elapsed real time, including 26 ms collecting
    1631 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    184960000 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-scheme:
    6 collections
    565 ms elapsed cpu time, including 90 ms collecting
    566 ms elapsed real time, including 91 ms collecting
    544 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    21 ms elapsed sys time, including 20 ms collecting
    24176528 bytes allocated
running stats for scheme (40000):
    44 collections
    1631 ms elapsed cpu time, including 25 ms collecting
    1630 ms elapsed real time, including 26 ms collecting
    1630 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    184960000 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-scheme:
    6 collections
    565 ms elapsed cpu time, including 90 ms collecting
    566 ms elapsed real time, including 91 ms collecting
    544 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    21 ms elapsed sys time, including 20 ms collecting
    24176528 bytes allocated
running stats for scheme (40000):
    44 collections
    1631 ms elapsed cpu time, including 25 ms collecting
    1631 ms elapsed real time, including 26 ms collecting
    1630 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    184960000 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-scheme:
    6 collections
    565 ms elapsed cpu time, including 90 ms collecting
    565 ms elapsed real time, including 91 ms collecting
    544 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    21 ms elapsed sys time, including 20 ms collecting
    24176528 bytes allocated
running stats for scheme (40000):
    44 collections
    1631 ms elapsed cpu time, including 25 ms collecting
    1632 ms elapsed real time, including 26 ms collecting
    1630 ms elapsed user time, including 25 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    184960000 bytes allocated
running simplex
running stats for compile-simplex:
    2 collections
    85 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    86 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    75 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8474000 bytes allocated
running stats for simplex (160000):
    200 collections
    1413 ms elapsed cpu time, including 78 ms collecting
    1414 ms elapsed real time, including 79 ms collecting
    1405 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    834572288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-simplex:
    2 collections
    85 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    86 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    75 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8474000 bytes allocated
running stats for simplex (160000):
    200 collections
    1414 ms elapsed cpu time, including 78 ms collecting
    1414 ms elapsed real time, including 79 ms collecting
    1406 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    834572288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-simplex:
    2 collections
    85 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    86 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    75 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8474000 bytes allocated
running stats for simplex (160000):
    200 collections
    1413 ms elapsed cpu time, including 77 ms collecting
    1414 ms elapsed real time, including 78 ms collecting
    1405 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    834572288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-simplex:
    2 collections
    85 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    86 ms elapsed real time, including 34 ms collecting
    75 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8474000 bytes allocated
running stats for simplex (160000):
    200 collections
    1414 ms elapsed cpu time, including 78 ms collecting
    1415 ms elapsed real time, including 79 ms collecting
    1406 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    834572288 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-simplex:
    2 collections
    87 ms elapsed cpu time, including 34 ms collecting
    87 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    76 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    8474000 bytes allocated
running stats for simplex (160000):
    200 collections
    1415 ms elapsed cpu time, including 78 ms collecting
    1415 ms elapsed real time, including 79 ms collecting
    1407 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    8 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    834572288 bytes allocated
running slatex
running stats for compile-slatex:
    7 collections
    285 ms elapsed cpu time, including 89 ms collecting
    286 ms elapsed real time, including 89 ms collecting
    266 ms elapsed user time, including 71 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 18 ms collecting
    29121504 bytes allocated
running stats for slatex (30):
    29 collections
    2471 ms elapsed cpu time, including 480 ms collecting
    3466 ms elapsed real time, including 481 ms collecting
    827 ms elapsed user time, including 164 ms collecting
    1644 ms elapsed sys time, including 316 ms collecting
    121217136 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-slatex:
    7 collections
    284 ms elapsed cpu time, including 88 ms collecting
    285 ms elapsed real time, including 89 ms collecting
    265 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 18 ms collecting
    29121504 bytes allocated
running stats for slatex (30):
    29 collections
    2324 ms elapsed cpu time, including 470 ms collecting
    3868 ms elapsed real time, including 471 ms collecting
    846 ms elapsed user time, including 164 ms collecting
    1478 ms elapsed sys time, including 306 ms collecting
    121217136 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-slatex:
    7 collections
    284 ms elapsed cpu time, including 88 ms collecting
    285 ms elapsed real time, including 89 ms collecting
    266 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    18 ms elapsed sys time, including 18 ms collecting
    29121504 bytes allocated
running stats for slatex (30):
    29 collections
    2309 ms elapsed cpu time, including 470 ms collecting
    3970 ms elapsed real time, including 471 ms collecting
    845 ms elapsed user time, including 165 ms collecting
    1464 ms elapsed sys time, including 305 ms collecting
    121217136 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-slatex:
    7 collections
    284 ms elapsed cpu time, including 88 ms collecting
    284 ms elapsed real time, including 88 ms collecting
    265 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    19 ms elapsed sys time, including 18 ms collecting
    29121504 bytes allocated
running stats for slatex (30):
    29 collections
    2305 ms elapsed cpu time, including 470 ms collecting
    3809 ms elapsed real time, including 471 ms collecting
    845 ms elapsed user time, including 165 ms collecting
    1460 ms elapsed sys time, including 305 ms collecting
    121217136 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-slatex:
    7 collections
    283 ms elapsed cpu time, including 88 ms collecting
    283 ms elapsed real time, including 88 ms collecting
    265 ms elapsed user time, including 70 ms collecting
    18 ms elapsed sys time, including 18 ms collecting
    29121504 bytes allocated
running stats for slatex (30):
    29 collections
    2305 ms elapsed cpu time, including 468 ms collecting
    4074 ms elapsed real time, including 469 ms collecting
    845 ms elapsed user time, including 164 ms collecting
    1460 ms elapsed sys time, including 304 ms collecting
    121217136 bytes allocated
running string
running stats for compile-string:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1885416 bytes allocated
running stats for string (4):
    159 collections
    2170 ms elapsed cpu time, including 1361 ms collecting
    2170 ms elapsed real time, including 1362 ms collecting
    1448 ms elapsed user time, including 640 ms collecting
    722 ms elapsed sys time, including 721 ms collecting
    503288704 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-string:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1885416 bytes allocated
running stats for string (4):
    159 collections
    2231 ms elapsed cpu time, including 1418 ms collecting
    2239 ms elapsed real time, including 1423 ms collecting
    1473 ms elapsed user time, including 662 ms collecting
    758 ms elapsed sys time, including 756 ms collecting
    503288704 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-string:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1885416 bytes allocated
running stats for string (4):
    159 collections
    2261 ms elapsed cpu time, including 1446 ms collecting
    2271 ms elapsed real time, including 1453 ms collecting
    1490 ms elapsed user time, including 677 ms collecting
    771 ms elapsed sys time, including 769 ms collecting
    503288704 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-string:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1885416 bytes allocated
running stats for string (4):
    159 collections
    2238 ms elapsed cpu time, including 1423 ms collecting
    2243 ms elapsed real time, including 1428 ms collecting
    1482 ms elapsed user time, including 670 ms collecting
    756 ms elapsed sys time, including 753 ms collecting
    503288704 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-string:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1885416 bytes allocated
running stats for string (4):
    159 collections
    2226 ms elapsed cpu time, including 1413 ms collecting
    2229 ms elapsed real time, including 1416 ms collecting
    1474 ms elapsed user time, including 663 ms collecting
    752 ms elapsed sys time, including 750 ms collecting
    503288704 bytes allocated
running sum
running stats for compile-sum:
    1 collection
    47 ms elapsed cpu time, including 33 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed real time, including 37 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    1623496 bytes allocated
running stats for sum (30000):
    no collections
    1813 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1817 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1811 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    2 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sum:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    1623496 bytes allocated
running stats for sum (30000):
    no collections
    1983 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1990 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1979 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    4 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sum:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    1623496 bytes allocated
running stats for sum (30000):
    no collections
    1933 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1935 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1932 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sum:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 36 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    1623496 bytes allocated
running stats for sum (30000):
    no collections
    1966 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1970 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1964 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    2 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sum:
    1 collection
    49 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    1623496 bytes allocated
running stats for sum (30000):
    no collections
    1947 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1950 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1946 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    1 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running sum1
running stats for compile-sum1:
    1 collection
    50 ms elapsed cpu time, including 35 ms collecting
    51 ms elapsed real time, including 35 ms collecting
    39 ms elapsed user time, including 24 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    1745952 bytes allocated
running stats for sum1 (5):
    89 collections
    2257 ms elapsed cpu time, including 67 ms collecting
    2261 ms elapsed real time, including 67 ms collecting
    2239 ms elapsed user time, including 60 ms collecting
    18 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    373935584 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sum1:
    1 collection
    43 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    33 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1745952 bytes allocated
running stats for sum1 (5):
    89 collections
    2139 ms elapsed cpu time, including 62 ms collecting
    2139 ms elapsed real time, including 62 ms collecting
    2124 ms elapsed user time, including 55 ms collecting
    15 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    373935584 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sum1:
    1 collection
    43 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    33 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1745952 bytes allocated
running stats for sum1 (5):
    89 collections
    2139 ms elapsed cpu time, including 62 ms collecting
    2140 ms elapsed real time, including 62 ms collecting
    2124 ms elapsed user time, including 55 ms collecting
    15 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    373935584 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sum1:
    1 collection
    43 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    33 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1745952 bytes allocated
running stats for sum1 (5):
    89 collections
    2137 ms elapsed cpu time, including 62 ms collecting
    2138 ms elapsed real time, including 62 ms collecting
    2122 ms elapsed user time, including 55 ms collecting
    15 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    373935584 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sum1:
    1 collection
    43 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    33 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1745952 bytes allocated
running stats for sum1 (5):
    89 collections
    2139 ms elapsed cpu time, including 62 ms collecting
    2139 ms elapsed real time, including 62 ms collecting
    2124 ms elapsed user time, including 55 ms collecting
    15 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    373935584 bytes allocated
running sumfp
running stats for compile-sumfp:
    1 collection
    43 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    33 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1655656 bytes allocated
running stats for sumfp (8000):
    611 collections
    1181 ms elapsed cpu time, including 142 ms collecting
    1181 ms elapsed real time, including 145 ms collecting
    1172 ms elapsed user time, including 135 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    2560272384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumfp:
    1 collection
    43 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    33 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1655656 bytes allocated
running stats for sumfp (8000):
    611 collections
    1172 ms elapsed cpu time, including 142 ms collecting
    1173 ms elapsed real time, including 145 ms collecting
    1163 ms elapsed user time, including 135 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    2560272384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumfp:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1655656 bytes allocated
running stats for sumfp (8000):
    611 collections
    1178 ms elapsed cpu time, including 142 ms collecting
    1180 ms elapsed real time, including 145 ms collecting
    1169 ms elapsed user time, including 135 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    2560272384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumfp:
    1 collection
    43 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    33 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1655656 bytes allocated
running stats for sumfp (8000):
    611 collections
    1179 ms elapsed cpu time, including 142 ms collecting
    1179 ms elapsed real time, including 145 ms collecting
    1170 ms elapsed user time, including 135 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    2560272384 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumfp:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1655656 bytes allocated
running stats for sumfp (8000):
    611 collections
    1216 ms elapsed cpu time, including 143 ms collecting
    1217 ms elapsed real time, including 146 ms collecting
    1207 ms elapsed user time, including 136 ms collecting
    9 ms elapsed sys time, including 7 ms collecting
    2560272384 bytes allocated
running sumloop
running stats for compile-sumloop:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1762136 bytes allocated
running stats for sumloop (2):
    no collections
    1203 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1204 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1203 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumloop:
    1 collection
    52 ms elapsed cpu time, including 37 ms collecting
    53 ms elapsed real time, including 38 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    15 ms elapsed sys time, including 15 ms collecting
    1762136 bytes allocated
running stats for sumloop (2):
    no collections
    1203 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1203 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1203 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumloop:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1762136 bytes allocated
running stats for sumloop (2):
    no collections
    1203 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1203 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1203 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumloop:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1762136 bytes allocated
running stats for sumloop (2):
    no collections
    1203 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1203 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1203 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumloop:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1762136 bytes allocated
running stats for sumloop (2):
    no collections
    1203 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1203 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1203 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running sumloop2
running stats for compile-sumloop2:
    1 collection
    43 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    33 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1667944 bytes allocated
running stats for sumloop (2):
    no collections
    1561 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1563 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1561 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    48 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumloop2:
    1 collection
    43 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    33 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1667944 bytes allocated
running stats for sumloop (2):
    no collections
    1560 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1560 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1560 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    48 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumloop2:
    1 collection
    43 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    33 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1667944 bytes allocated
running stats for sumloop (2):
    no collections
    1558 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1558 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1558 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    48 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumloop2:
    1 collection
    43 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    33 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1667944 bytes allocated
running stats for sumloop (2):
    no collections
    1562 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1563 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1562 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    48 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-sumloop2:
    1 collection
    43 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    44 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    33 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1667944 bytes allocated
running stats for sumloop (2):
    no collections
    1567 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1568 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1567 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    48 bytes allocated
running tail
running stats for compile-tail:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1842784 bytes allocated
running stats for tail (4):
    86 collections
    1704 ms elapsed cpu time, including 416 ms collecting
    2112 ms elapsed real time, including 417 ms collecting
    1463 ms elapsed user time, including 262 ms collecting
    241 ms elapsed sys time, including 154 ms collecting
    361744992 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-tail:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1842784 bytes allocated
running stats for tail (4):
    86 collections
    1711 ms elapsed cpu time, including 422 ms collecting
    1831 ms elapsed real time, including 423 ms collecting
    1468 ms elapsed user time, including 266 ms collecting
    243 ms elapsed sys time, including 156 ms collecting
    361744992 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-tail:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1842784 bytes allocated
running stats for tail (4):
    86 collections
    1705 ms elapsed cpu time, including 418 ms collecting
    1828 ms elapsed real time, including 419 ms collecting
    1465 ms elapsed user time, including 263 ms collecting
    240 ms elapsed sys time, including 155 ms collecting
    361744992 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-tail:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 30 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1842784 bytes allocated
running stats for tail (4):
    86 collections
    1704 ms elapsed cpu time, including 417 ms collecting
    1825 ms elapsed real time, including 418 ms collecting
    1463 ms elapsed user time, including 262 ms collecting
    241 ms elapsed sys time, including 155 ms collecting
    361744992 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-tail:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 30 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 20 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1842784 bytes allocated
running stats for tail (4):
    86 collections
    1706 ms elapsed cpu time, including 418 ms collecting
    1828 ms elapsed real time, including 419 ms collecting
    1465 ms elapsed user time, including 263 ms collecting
    241 ms elapsed sys time, including 155 ms collecting
    361744992 bytes allocated
running tak
running stats for compile-tak:
    1 collection
    44 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    34 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1661992 bytes allocated
running stats for tak (3000):
    no collections
    1932 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1933 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1932 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-tak:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1661992 bytes allocated
running stats for tak (3000):
    no collections
    1969 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1970 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1969 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-tak:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1661992 bytes allocated
running stats for tak (3000):
    no collections
    1957 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1959 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1955 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    2 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-tak:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1661992 bytes allocated
running stats for tak (3000):
    no collections
    1934 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1934 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1934 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-tak:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1661992 bytes allocated
running stats for tak (3000):
    no collections
    1934 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1933 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1934 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running takl
running stats for compile-takl:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1886688 bytes allocated
running stats for takl (500):
    no collections
    1886 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1886 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1886 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-takl:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    37 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1886688 bytes allocated
running stats for takl (500):
    no collections
    1886 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1887 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1886 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-takl:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1886688 bytes allocated
running stats for takl (500):
    no collections
    1886 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1887 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1886 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-takl:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    47 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1886688 bytes allocated
running stats for takl (500):
    no collections
    1886 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1887 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1886 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-takl:
    1 collection
    46 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    36 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1886688 bytes allocated
running stats for takl (500):
    no collections
    1886 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1887 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1886 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running trav1
running stats for compile-trav1:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4492864 bytes allocated
running stats for trav1 (150):
    46 collections
    1586 ms elapsed cpu time, including 147 ms collecting
    1586 ms elapsed real time, including 149 ms collecting
    1574 ms elapsed user time, including 136 ms collecting
    12 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    191965208 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-trav1:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    60 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4492864 bytes allocated
running stats for trav1 (150):
    46 collections
    1585 ms elapsed cpu time, including 147 ms collecting
    1586 ms elapsed real time, including 148 ms collecting
    1573 ms elapsed user time, including 136 ms collecting
    12 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    191965208 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-trav1:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4492864 bytes allocated
running stats for trav1 (150):
    46 collections
    1585 ms elapsed cpu time, including 146 ms collecting
    1586 ms elapsed real time, including 147 ms collecting
    1573 ms elapsed user time, including 135 ms collecting
    12 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    191965208 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-trav1:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4492864 bytes allocated
running stats for trav1 (150):
    46 collections
    1585 ms elapsed cpu time, including 147 ms collecting
    1587 ms elapsed real time, including 148 ms collecting
    1573 ms elapsed user time, including 136 ms collecting
    12 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    191965208 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-trav1:
    1 collection
    58 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed real time, including 31 ms collecting
    48 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    4492864 bytes allocated
running stats for trav1 (150):
    46 collections
    1585 ms elapsed cpu time, including 147 ms collecting
    1586 ms elapsed real time, including 148 ms collecting
    1573 ms elapsed user time, including 136 ms collecting
    12 ms elapsed sys time, including 11 ms collecting
    191965208 bytes allocated
running trav2
running stats for compile-trav2:
    2 collections
    70 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    71 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5807464 bytes allocated
running stats for trav2 (40):
    no collections
    1683 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1683 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1683 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-trav2:
    2 collections
    69 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    70 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5807464 bytes allocated
running stats for trav2 (40):
    no collections
    1682 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1684 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1682 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-trav2:
    2 collections
    70 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    70 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5807464 bytes allocated
running stats for trav2 (40):
    no collections
    1683 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1684 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1683 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-trav2:
    2 collections
    70 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    70 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5807464 bytes allocated
running stats for trav2 (40):
    no collections
    1688 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1690 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1683 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    5 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-trav2:
    2 collections
    70 ms elapsed cpu time, including 32 ms collecting
    70 ms elapsed real time, including 33 ms collecting
    59 ms elapsed user time, including 22 ms collecting
    11 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    5807464 bytes allocated
running stats for trav2 (40):
    no collections
    1682 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1683 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1682 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 bytes allocated
running triangl
running stats for compile-triangl:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2329656 bytes allocated
running stats for triangl (12):
    no collections
    1721 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1721 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1721 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    1116000 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-triangl:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2329656 bytes allocated
running stats for triangl (12):
    no collections
    1721 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1721 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1721 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    1116000 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-triangl:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    50 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2329656 bytes allocated
running stats for triangl (12):
    no collections
    1721 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1721 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1721 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    1116000 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-triangl:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2329656 bytes allocated
running stats for triangl (12):
    no collections
    1721 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1722 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1721 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    1116000 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-triangl:
    1 collection
    48 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    49 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    38 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    2329656 bytes allocated
running stats for triangl (12):
    no collections
    1721 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1722 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1721 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    0 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    1116000 bytes allocated
running wc
running stats for compile-wc:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1867392 bytes allocated
running stats for wc (15):
    no collections
    1747 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1749 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1702 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    250320 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-wc:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1867392 bytes allocated
running stats for wc (15):
    no collections
    1747 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1749 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1702 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    250320 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-wc:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1867392 bytes allocated
running stats for wc (15):
    no collections
    1748 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1750 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1702 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    250320 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-wc:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1867392 bytes allocated
running stats for wc (15):
    no collections
    1747 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1749 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1702 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    250320 bytes allocated
running stats for compile-wc:
    1 collection
    45 ms elapsed cpu time, including 31 ms collecting
    46 ms elapsed real time, including 32 ms collecting
    35 ms elapsed user time, including 21 ms collecting
    10 ms elapsed sys time, including 10 ms collecting
    1867392 bytes allocated
running stats for wc (15):
    no collections
    1747 ms elapsed cpu time, including 0 ms collecting
    1748 ms elapsed real time, including 0 ms collecting
    1702 ms elapsed user time, including 0 ms collecting
    45 ms elapsed sys time, including 0 ms collecting
    250320 bytes allocated
